■ to 



<^£$% 







Cornell University 
Library 



The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924075867014 




3 1924 075 867 014 



THE 



HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 



SIR WALTER SCOTT, Bart. 




^iS'^a^^-Si^A^^^zM^S^^A 



THE 



HEART 



OF 



MID-LOTHIAN 



BY 



SIR WALTEE SCOTT, Bart. 



WITH STEEL PLATES FROM DESIGNS BY 



GEORGE CRUIKSHANK AND OTHER ARTISTS 



LONDON and NEW YORK 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE & SONS 

187s 



LONDON : 
BRADBURY, AGNEW, & CO., PRINTERS, WHITEFRIARS. 



THE HEART 

OF 

MID-LOTHIAN. 



Hear, Land o' Cakes and brither Scots, 
Frae Maidenkirk to Johnny Groats' 
If there's a hole in a' your coats, 

I rede ye tent it ; 
A chiel's amang you takin notes, 

An' faith he'll prent it ! — BURNS. 



INTRODUCTION. 

The author has stated, in the preface to the Chronicles of the 
Canongate, 1827, that he received from an anonymous corre- 
spondent an account of the incident upon which the following 
story is founded. He is now at liberty to say, that the information 
was conveyed to him by a late amiable and ingenious lady, whose 
wit and power of remarking and judging of character still survive 
in the memory of her friends. Her maiden name was Miss Helen 
Lawson, of Girthhead, and she was wife of Thomas Goldie, Esq., 
of Craigmuie, Commissary of Dumfries. 

Her communication was in these words : 

" I had taken for summer lodgings a cottage near the old Abbey 
of Lincluden. It had formerly been inhabited by a lady who had 
pleasure in embellishing cottages, which she found perhaps homely 
and even poor enough ; mine, therefore, possessed many marks of 
taste and elegance unusual in this species of habitation in Scot- 
land, where a cottage is literally what its name declares. 

" From my cottage door I had a partial view of the old Abbey 
before mentioned ; some of the highest arches were seen over, and 
some through the trees scattered along a lane which led down to 
the ruin, and the strange fantastic shapes of almost all those old 
ashe's accorded wonderfully well with the building they at once 
shaded and ornamented. 

" The Abbey itself from my door was almost on a level with the 
cottage ; but on coming to the end of the lane, it was discovered 
to be situated on a high perpendicular bank, at the foot of which 
run the clear waters of the Cluden, where they hasten to join the 
sweeping Nith, 

' Whose distant roaring swells and' fa's.' 

As my kitchen and parlour were not very far . distant, I one day 



6 INTRODUCTION TO 

went in to purchase some chickens from a person I heard offering 
them for sale. It was a little, rather stout-looking woman, who 
seemed to be between seventy and eighty years of age ; she was 
almost covered with a tartan plaid, and her cap had over it a black 
silk hood, tied under the chin, a piece of dress still much in use 
among elderly women of that rank of life in Scotland ; her eyes 
were dark, and remarkably lively and intelligent ; I entered into 
conversation with her, and began by asking how she maintained 
herself, &c. 

"She' said that in winter she footed stockings, that is, knit feet 
to country people's' stockings, which bears about the same relation 
to stocking-knitting that cobbling does to shoe-making, and is of 
course both less" profitable and less dignified ; she likewise taught 
a. few children to read, and in summer she whiles reared a few 
chickens. ' 

" I said I could venture to guess from her face she had never 
been married. She laughed heartily at this, and said, ' I maun hae 
the queerest face that ever was x seen, that ye could guess that. 
Now, do tell me, madam, how ye cam to think sae ?' I told her it 
was from her cheerful disengaged countenance. She said, ' Mem, 
have ye na far mair reason to be happy than me, wi' a gude hus- 
band and a fine family o' bairns, and plenty o' every thing? for me, 
I'm the puirest o' a' puir bodies, and can hardly contrive to keep 
mysel alive in a' the wee bits o' ways I hae tell't ye.' After some 
more conversation, during which I was more and more pleased 
with the old woman's sensible conversation, and the naivete of her 
remarks, she rose to go away, when I asked her name. Her coun- 
tenance suddenly clouded, and she said gravely, rather colouring, 
' My name is Helen Walker, but your husband kens weel about me.' 

" In the evening I related how much I had been pleased, and in- 
quired what was extraordinary in the history of the poor woman. 
Mr. Goldie said, there were perhaps few more remarkable people 
than Helen Walker. She had been left an orphan, with the charge 
of a sister considerably younger than herself, and who was edu- 
cated and maintained by her exertions. Attached to her by so 
many ties, therefore, it will not be easy to conceive her feelings, 
when she found that this only sister must be tried by the laws of 
her country for child-murder, and upon being called as principal 
witness against her. The counsel for the prisoner told Helen, that 
if she could declare that her sister had made any preparations, 
however slight, or had given her any intimation on the subject, 
that such a statement would save her sister's life, as she was the 
principal witness against her. Helen said, ' It is impossible for me 
to swear to a falsehood ; and, whatever may be the consequence, I 
will give my oath according to my conscience.' 

" The trial came on, and the sister was found guilty and con- 
demned ; but, in Scotland, six weeks must elapse between the sen- 
tence and the execution, and Helen Walker availed herself of it. 
The very day of her sister's condemnation, she got a petition 
drawn, stating the peculiar circumstances of the case, and that 
very night set out on foot to London. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 7 

" Without introduction or recommendation, with her simple 
(perhaps ill-expressed) petition, drawn up by some inferior clerk of 
the court, she presented herself, in her tartan plaid and country 
attire, to the late Duke of Argyle, who immediately procured the 
pardon she petitioned for, and Helen returned with it on foot, just 
in time to save her sister. 

" I was so strongly interested by this narrative, that I determined 
immediately to prosecute my acquaintance with Helen Walker; 
but as I was to leave the country next day, I was obliged to defer 
it till my return in spring, when the first walk I took was to Helen 
Walker's cottage. 

" She had died a short time before. My regret was extreme, and 
I endeavoured to obtain some account of Helen from an old woman 
who inhabited the other end of her cottage. I inquired if Helen 
ever spoke of her past history, her journey to London, &c. ' Na,' 
the old woman said, ' Helen was a wily body, and whene'er ony o' 
the neebors asked ony thing about it, she aye turned the con- 
versation.' 

" In short, every answer I received only tended to increase my 
regret, and raise my opinion of Helen Walker, who could unite so 
much prudence with so much heroic virtue." 

This narrative was enclosed in the following letter to the author, 
without date or signature : — 

" SIR, — The occurrence just related happened to me twenty-six 
years ago. Helen Walker lies buried in the churchyard of Iron- 
gray, about six miles from Dumfries. I once proposed that a small 
monument should have been erected to commemorate so remark- 
able a character, but I now prefer leaving it to you to perpetuate 
her memory in a more durable manner." 

The reader is now able to judge how far the author has improved 
upon, or fallen short of, the pleasing arid interesting sketch of high 
principle and steady affection displayed by Helen Walker, the pro- 
totype of the fictitious Jeanie Deans. Mrs. Goldie was unfortu- 
nately dead before the author had given his name to these volumes, 
so he lost all opportunity of thanking that lady for her highly valu- 
able communication. But her daughter, Miss Goldie, obliged him 
with the following additional information. 

" Mrs. Goldie endeavoured to collect further particulars of Helen 
Walker, particularly concerning her journey to London, but found 
this nearly impossible ; as the natural dignity of her character, and 
a high sense of family respectability, made her so indissolubly 
connect her sister's, disgrace with her own exertions, that none of 
her neighbours durst ever question her upon the subject. One old 
woman, a distant relation of Helen's, and. who is still living, says 
she worked an harvest with her, but that she never ventured to ask 
her about her sister's trial, or her journey to London ; ' Helen, she 
added, ' was a lofty body, and used a high style o' language.' The 
same old woman says, that every year Helen received a cheese 
from her sister, who lived at Whitehaven, and that she always sent 



8 INTRODUCTION TO 

a liberal portion of it to herself, or to her father's family. This 
fact, though trivial in itself, strongly marks the affection subsisting 
between the two sisters, and the complete conviction on the mind 
of the criminal, that her sister had acted solely from high prin- 
ciple, not from any want of feeling, which another small but cha- 
racteristic trait will further illustrate. A gentleman, a relation of 
Mrs. Goldie's, who happened to be travelling in the North of Eng- 
land, on coming to a small inn, was shewn into the parlour by a 
female servant, who, after cautiously shutting the door, said, ' Sir, 
I'm Nelly Walker's sister.' Thus practically shewing that she con- 
sidered her sister as better known by her high conduet, than even 
herself by a different kind of celebrity. 

" Mrs. Goldie was extremely anxious to have a tombstone and an 
inscription upon it, erected in Irongray churchyard ; and if Sir 
Walter Scott will condescend to write the last, a little subscription 
could be easily raised in the immediate neighbourhood, and Mrs. 
Goldie's wish be thus fulfilled." 

It is scarcely necessary to add, that the request of Miss Goldie 
will be most willingly complied with, and without the necessity of 
any tax on the public. Nor is there much occasion to repeat how 
much the author conceives himself obliged to his unknown corre- 
spondent, who thus supplied him with a theme affording such a 
pleasing view of the moral dignity of virtue, though unaided by 
birth, beauty, or talent. If the picture has suffered in the execu- 
tion, it is from the failure of the author's powers to present in 
detail the same simple and striking portrait exhibited in Mrs. 
Goldie's letter. 

Abbotsford, \ 
April i, 1830. ) 



POSTSCRIPT. 

Although it would be impossible to add much to Mrs. Goldie's 
picturesque and most interesting account of Helen Walker, the pro- 
totype of the imaginary Jeanie Deans, the Editor may be pardoned 
for introducing two or three anecdotes respecting that excellent 
person, which he has collected from a volume entitled, " Sketches 
from Nature, by John M'Diarmid," a gentleman who conducts an 
able provincial paper in the town of Dumfries. 

Helen was the daughter of a small farmer in a place called Dal- 
whairn, in the parish of Irongray ; where, after the death of her 
father, she continued, with the unassuming piety of a Scottish pea- 
sant, to support her mother by her own unremitted labour and pri- 
vations ; a case so common that even yet, I am proud to say, few 
of my countrywomen would shrink from the duty. 

Helen Walker was held among her equals pensy, that is, proud 
or conceited ; but the facts brought to prove this accusation seem 
only to evince a strength of character superior to those around her. 
Thus it was remarked, that when it thundered she went with her 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 9 

work and her Bible to the front of the cottage, alleging that the 
Almighty could smite in the city as well as in the field. 

Mr. M'Diarmid mentions more particularly the misfortune of 
her sister, which he supposes to have taken place previous to 1736. 
Helen Walker, declining every proposal of saving her relation's life 
at the expense of truth, borrowed a sum of money sufficient for her 
journey, walked the whole distance to London barefoot, and made 
her way to John Duke of Argyle. She was heard to say that, by 
the Almighty's strength, she had been enabled to meet the Duke 
at the most critical moment, which, if lost, would have caused the 
inevitable forfeiture of her sister's life. 

Isabella, or Tibby Walker, saved from the fate which impended 
over her, was married by the person who had wronged her, (named 
Waugh,) and lived happily for great part of a century, uniformly 
acknowledging the extraordinary affection to which she owed her 
preservation. 

Helen Walker died about the end of the year 1791, and her 
remains are interred in the churchyard of her native parish of Iron- 
gray, in a romantic cemetery on the banks of the Cairn. That a 
character so distinguished for her undaunted love of virtue, lived 
and died in poverty, if not want, serves only to shew us how insig- 
nificant, in the sight of Heaven, are our principal objects of ambi- 
tion upon earth. 



TO THE BEST OF PATRONS, 

A PLEASED AND INDULGENT READER, 
JEDEDIAH CLEISHBOTHAM 

WISHES HEALTH, AND INCREASE, AND CONTENTMENT. 



Courteous Reader, 

If ingratitude comprehendeth every vice, surely so foul a stain 
worst of all beseemeth him whose life has been devoted to instruct- 
ing youth in virtue and in humane letters. Therefore have I chosen,, 
in this prolegomenon, to unload my burden of thanks at thy feet, 
for the favour with which thou hast kindly entertained the Tales of 
my Landlord. Certes, if thou hast chuckled over their facetious 
and festivous descriptions, or hadst thy mind filled with pleasure at 
the strange and pleasant turns of fortune which they record, verily, 
I have also simpered when I beheld a second story with attics, that 
has arisen on the basis of my small domicile at Gandercleugh, the 
walls having been aforehand pronounced by Deacon Barrow to be 
capable of enduring such an elevation. Nor has it been without 
delectation, that I have endued a new coat, (snuff-brown, and with 
metal buttons,) having all nether garments corresponding thereto. 
We do therefore lie, in respect of each other, under a reciprocation 



to INTRODUCTION TO 

of benefits, whereof those received by me being the most solid, (in 
respect that a new house and a new coat are better than a new 
tale and an auld song,) it is meet that my gratitude should be ex- 
pressed with the louder voice and more preponderating vehemence. 
And how should it be so expressed '—Certainly not in words 
only, but in act and deed. It is with this sole purpose, and dis- 
claiming all intention of purchasing that pendicle or pottle of land 
called the Carlinescroft, lying adjacent to my garden, and measur- 
ing seven acres, three roods, and fourperches,that I have committed 
to the eyes of those who thought well of the former tomes, these four 
additional volumes of the Tales of my Landlord. Not the less, if 
Peter Prayfort be minded to sell the said poffle, it is at his own 
choice to say so ; and, peradventure, he may meet with a pur- 
chaser : unless (gentle reader) the pleasing pourtraictures of Peter 
Pattieson, now given unto thee in- particular, and unto the public in 
general, shall have lost their favour in thine eyes, whereof I am 
no way distrustful. And so much confidence do I repose in thy 
continued favour, that, should thy lawful occasions call thee _ to the 
town of Gandercleugh, a place frequented by most at one time or 
other in their lives, I will enrich thine eyes with a sight of those 
precious manuscripts whence thou hast derived so much delecta- 
tion, thy nose with a snuff from my mull, and thy palate with a 
dram from my bottle of strong waters, called, by the learned of 
Gandercleugh, the Dominie's Dribble o' Drink. 

It is there, O highly esteemed and beloved reader, thou wilt be 
able to bear testimony, through the medium of thine own senses, 
against the children of vanity, who have sought to identify thy 
friend and servant with I know not what inditer of vain fables ; who 
hath cumbered the world with his devices, but shrunken from the 
responsibility thereof. Truly, this hath been well termed a genera- 
tion hard ot faith ; since what can a man do to assert his property 
in a printed tome, saving to put his name in the title-page thereof, 
with his description, or designation, as the lawyers term it, and 
place of abode ? Of a surety. I would have such sceptics consider 
how they themselves would brook to have their works ascribed 
to others, their names and professions imputed as forgeries, and 
their very existence brought into question ; even although, peradven- 
ture, it may be it is of little consequence to any but themselves, not 
only whether they are living or dead, but even whether they ever 
lived or no. Yet have my maligners carried their uncharitable 
censures still farther. 

These cavillers have not only doubted mine identity, although thus 
plainly proved, but they have impeached my veracity and the 
authenticity of my historical narratives ! Verily I can only say in 
answer, that I have been cautelous in quoting mine authorities. It 
is true, indeed, that if I had hearkened with only one ear, I might 
have rehearsed my tale with more acceptation from those who love 
to hear but half the truth. It is, it may hap, not altogether to the 
discredit of our kindly nation of Scotland, that we are apt to take 
an interest, warm, yea partial, in the deeds and sentiments of our 
forefathers. He whom his adversaries described as a perjured 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. II 

Prelatist,is desirous that his predecessors should be held moderate 
in their power, and just in their execution of its privileges, when, 
truly, the unimpassioned peruser of the annals of those times shall 
deem them sanguinary, violent, and tyrannical. Again, the repre- 
sentatives of the suffering Nonconformists desire that their ances- 
tors, the Cameronians, shall be represented not simply as honest 
enthusiasts, oppressed for conscience-sake, but persons of fine 
breeding, and valiant heroes. Truly the historian cannot gratify 
these predilections. He needs mustdescribe th'e cavaliers as proud 
and high-spirited, cruel, remorseless, and vindictive ; the suffering 
party as honourably tenacious of their opinions under persecution ; < 
their own tempers being, however, sullen, fierce, and rude ; their 
opinions absurd and extravagant ; and their whole course of con- 
duct that of persons whom hellebore would better have suited than 
prosecutions unto death for high-treason. Nathless, while such 
and so preposterous were the opinions on either side, there were, it 
cannot be doubted, men of virtue and worth on both, to entitle 
either party to claim merit from its martyrs. It has been demanded 
of me, Jedediah Cleishbotham, by what right I am entitled to con- 
stitute myself an impartial judge of their discrepancies of opinions, 
seeing (as it is stated) that I must necessarily have descended from 
one or other of the contending parties, and be, of course, wedded 
for better or for worse, according to the reasonable practice of 
Scotland, to its dogmata, or opinions, and bound, as it were, by the 
tie matrimonial, or, to speak without metaphor, ex jure sanguinis, 
to maintain them in preference to all others. 

But, nothing denying the rationality of the rule, which calls on 
all now living to rule their political and religious opinions by those 
of their great grandfathers, and inevitable as seems the one or the 
other horn of the dilemma betwixt which my adversaries conceive 
they have pirihed me to the wall, I yet spy some means of refuge, 
and claim a privilege to write and speak of both parties with im- 
partiality. For, O ye powers of logic ! when the Prelatists and 
Presbyterians of old times went together by the ears in this unlucky 
country, my ancestor (venerated be his memory !) was one of the 
people called Quakers, and suffered severe handling from either 
side, even to the extenuation of his purse and the incarceration of 
his person. 

Craving thy pardon, gentle Reader, for these few words con- 
cerning me and mine, I rest, as above expressed, thy sure and 
obligated friend.* 

Gandercleugh, ) J. C. 

this ist of April, 1818. ) 

* It is an old proverb, that "many a true word is spoken in jest." The ex- 
istence of Walter Scott, third son of Sir William Scott of Harden, is instructed, 
as it is called, by a charterunderthe great seal, Domino Willielmo Scott de Harden 
Militi, et Waltero Scott suo filio legitimo tertio genito, terrarum de Roberton 
(Douglas's Baronage, p. 215). The munificent old gentleman left all his four 
sons considerable estates, and settled those of Eilrig and Raeburn, together 
with valuable possessions around Lessudden, upon Walter, his third son, who 
is ancestor of the Scotts of Raeburn, and of the Author of Waverley. He appears 
to have become a convert to the doctrine of the Quakers, or Friends, and a 



12 INTRODUCTION TO 

great assertor of their peculiar tenets. This was probably at the time when 
George Fox, the celebrated apostle of the sect, made an expedition into the 
south of Scotland about 1657, on which occasion he boasts, that " as he first set 
his horse's feet upon Scottish ground, he felt the seed of grace to sparkle about 
him like innumerable sparks of fire." Upon the same occasion, probably, Sir 
Gideon Scott of Highchester, second son of Sir William, immediate elder 
brother of Walter, and ancestor of the author's friend and kinsman, the present 
representative of the family of Harden, also embraced the tenets of Quakerism. 
This last convert, Gideon, entered into a controversy with the Rev. James Kirk- 
ton, author of the Secret and True History of the Church of Scotland, which is 
noticed by my ingenious friend Mr. Charles Kirkpatricke Sharpe, in his valuable 
and curious edition of that work, 4to, 1817. Sir William Scott, eldest of the 
brothers, remained, amid the defection of his two younger brethren, an ortho- 
dox member of the Presbyterian Church, and used such means for reclaiming 
Walter of Raeburn from his heresy, as savoured far more of persecution than 
persuasion. In this he was assisted by MacDougal of Makerston, brother to 
Isabella MacDougal, the wife of the said Walter, and who, like her husband, 
had conformed to the Quaker tenets. 

The interest possessed by Sir William Scott and Makerston was powerful 
enough to procure the two following acts of the Privy Council of Scotland, 
directed against Walter of Raeburn as an heretic and convert to Quakerism, 
appointing him to be imprisoned first in Edinburgh jail, and then in that of Jed- 
burgh ; and his children to be taken by force from the society and direction of 
their parents, and educated at a distance from them, besides the assignment of 
a sum for their maintenance, sufficient in those times to be burdensome to a 
moderate Scottish estate. 

"Apud Edin. vigesimo Junii 1665. 

' ' The Lords of his Magesty's Privy Council having receaved information that 
Scott of Raeburn and Isobel Mackdougall, his wife, being infected with the error 
of Quakerism, doe endeavour to breid and traine up William, Walter, and 
Isobel Scotts, their children, in the same profession, doe therefore give order 
and command to Sir William Scott of Harden, the said Raeburn's brother, to 
seperat and take away the saids children from the custody'and society of the 
saids parents, and to cause educat and bring them up in his owne house, or 
any other convenient place, and ordaines letters to be direct at the said Sir Wil- 
liam's instance against Raeburn, for a maintenance to the saids children, and 
that the said Sir Wm. give ane account of his diligence with all conveniency," 

"Edinburgh, 5th July, 1666. 

" Anent a petition presented be Sir Wm. Scott of Harden, for himself and in 
name and behalf of the three children of Walter Scott of Raeburn, his brother, 
showing that the Lords of Councill, by ane act of the 22d day of Junii, 1665, did 
grant power and warrand to the petitioner, to separat and take away Raeburn's 
children, from his family and education, and to breed them in some convenient 
place, where they might be free from all infection in their younger years, from 
the principalis of Quakerism, and, for maintenance of the saids children, did 
ordain letters to be direct against Raeburn ; and, seeing the Petitioner, in 
obedience to the said order, did take away the saids children, being two sonnes 
and a daughter, and after some paines taken upon them in his owne family, hes 
sent them to the city of Glasgow, to be bread at schooles, and there to be 
principled with the knowledge of the true religion, and that it is necessary the 
Councill determine what shall be the maintenance for which Raeburn's three 
children may be charged, as likewise that Raeburn himself, being now in the 
Tolbooth of Edinburgh, where he dayley converses with all the Quakers who 
are prisoners there, and others who daily resort to them, whereby he is hardened 
in his pernitious opinions and principles, without all hope of recovery, unlesse 
he be separat from such pernitious company, humbly therefore, desyring that 
the Councell might determine upon the soume of money to be payed be Rae- 
burn, for the education of his children, to the petitioner, who will be countable 
therefor ; and that, in order to his conversion, the place of his imprisonment 
may be changed. The Lords of his Maj. Privy Councell having at length heard 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 13 

and considered the foresaid petition, doe modifie the soume of two thousand 
pounds Scots, to be payed yearly at the terme of Whitsunday bethe said Walter 
Scott of Raeburn, furth of his estate to the petitioner, for the entertainment 
and education of the said children, beginning the first termes payment thereof 
at Whitsunday last for the half year preceding, and so furth yearly, at the said 
terme of Whitsunday in tym comeing till furder orders ; and ordaines the said 
Walter Scott of Raeburn to be transported from the tolbooth of Edinburgh to 
the prison of Jedburgh, where his friends and others may have occasion to con- 
vert him. And to the effect he may be secured from the practice of other 
Quakers, the said Lords doe hereby discharge the magistrate? of Jedburgh to 
suffer any persons suspect of these principles to have access to him ; and in 
case any contraveen, that they secure ther persons till they be therfore puneist ; 
and ordaines letters to be direct heirupon in form, as effeirs." 

Both the sons, thus harshly separated from their father, proved good scholars. 
The eldest, William, who carried on the line of Raeburn, was, like his father, a 
deep Orientalist ; the younger, Walter, became a good classical scholar, a great 
friend and correspondent of the celebrated Dr. Pitcairn, and a Jacobite so dis- 
tinguished for zeal, that he made a vow never to shave his beard till the resto- 
ration of the exiled family. This last Walter Scott was the author's great- 
grandfather. 

There is yet another link betwixt the author and the simple-minded and ex- 
cellent Society of Friends, though a proselyte of much more importance than 
Walter Scott of Raeburn. The celebrated John Swinton of Swinton, xixth 
baron in descent of that ancient and once powerful family, was, with Sir Wil- 
liam Lockhart of Lee, the person whom Cromwell chiefly trusted in the manage- 
ment of the Scottish affairs during his usurpation. After the Restoration 
Swinton was devoted as a victim to the new order of things, and was brought 
down in the same vessel which conveyed the Marquis of Argyle to Edinburgh, 
where that nobleman was tried and executed. Swinton was destined to the 
same fate. He had assumed the habit, and entered into the Society of the 
Quakers, and appeared as one of their number before the Parliament of Scot- 
land. He renounced all legal defence, though several pleas were open to him, 
and answered in conformity to the principles of his sect, that at the time these 
crimes were imputed to him, he was in the gall of bitterness and bond of 
iniquity ; but that God Almighty having since called him to the light, he saw 
and acknowledged these errors, and did not refuse to pay the forfeit of them, 
even though, in the judgment of the Parliament, it should extend to life itself. 

Respect to fallen greatness, and to the patience and calm resignation with 
which a man once in high power expressed himself under such a change of 
fortune, found Swinton friends ;, family connections, and some interested consi- 
derations of Middleton the Commissioner, joined to procure his safety, and he 
was dismissed, but after a long imprisonment, and much dilapidation of his 
estates. It is said, that Swinton's admonitions, while confined in the Castle of 
Edinburgh, had a considerable share in converting to the tenets of the Friends 
Colonel David Barclay, then lying there in garrison. This was the father of 
Robert Barclay, author of the celebrated Apology for the Quakers. It may be 
observed amongthe inconsistencies of human nature, that Kirkton.Wodrow, and 
other Presbyterian authors, who have detailed the sufferings of their own sect 
for non-conformity with the established church, censure the government of the 
time for not exerting the civil power against the peaceful enthusiasts we have 
treated of, and some express particular chagrin at the escape of Swinton. 
Whatever might be his motives for assuming the tenets of the Friends, the old 
man retained them faithfully till the close of his life. 

Jean Swinton, grand-daughter of Sir John Swinton, son of Judge Swinton, as 
the Quaker was usually termed, was mother of Anne Rutherford, the author's 
mother. 

And thus, as in the play of the Anti-Jacobin, the ghost of the author's grand- 
mother having arisen to speak the Epilogue, it is full time to conclude, lest the 
reader should remonstrate that his desire to know the Author of Waverley never 
included a wish to be acquainted with his whole ancestry. 



THE HEART 



OF 



MID-LOTHIAN. 



CHAPTER I. 

BEING INTRODUCTORY. 



So down thy hill, romantic Ashbourn, glides 
The Derby dilly, carrying six insides.— FRERE. 

The times have changed in nothing more (we follow as we were 
wont the manuscript of Peter Pattieson) than in the rapid convey- 
ance of intelligence and communication betwixt one part of Scotland 
and another. It is not above twenty or thirty years, according to 
the evidence of many credible witnesses now alive, since a little 
miserable horse-cart, performing with difficulty a journey of thirty 
miles per diem, carried our mails from the capital of Scotland to 
its extremity. Nor was Scotland much more deficient in these 
accommodations, than our rich sister had been about eighty years 
before. Fielding, in his Tom Jones, and Farquhar, in a little farce 
called the Stage-Coach, have ridiculed the slowness of these 
vehicles of public accommodation. According to the latter autho- 
rity, the highest bribe could only induce the coachman to promise 
to anticipate by half an hour the usual time of his arrival at the 
Bull and Mouth. 

But in both countries these ancient, slow, and sure modes of 
conveyance, are now alike unknown ; mail-coach races against 
mail-coach, and high-flyer against high-flyer, through the most 
remote districts of Britain. And in our village alone, three post- 
coaches, and four coaches with men armed, and in scarlet cassocks, 
thunder through the streets each day, and rival in brilliancy and 
noise the invention of the celebrated tyrant : — 

Demens, qui nimbos et non imitabile fulmen, 
JEre et cornifiedum pulsu, simularat, equotum. 

Now and then, to complete the resemblance, and to correct the 
presumption of the venturous charioteers, it does happen that the 
career of these dashing rivals of Salmoneus meets' with as undesir- 
able and violent a termination as that of their prototype. It is on 
such occasions that the Insides and Outsides, to use the appropriate 
vehicular phrases, have reason to rue the exchange of the slow and 
safe motion of the ancient Fly-coaches, which, compared with the 
chariots of Mr. Palmer, so ill deserve the name. The ancient 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 



IS 



vehicle used to settle quietly down, like a ship scuttled and left to 
sink by the gradual influx of the waters, while the modern is 
smashed to pieces with the velocity of the same vessel hurled 
against breakers, or rather with the fury of a bomb bursting at the 
conclusion of its career through the air. The late ingenious Mr. 
Pennant, whose humour it was to set his face in stern opposition to 
these speedy conveyances, had collected, I have heard, a formidable 
list of such casualties, which, joined to the imposition of innkeepers, 
whose charges the passengers had no time to dispute, the sauciness 
of the coachman, and the uncontrolled and despotic authority of 
the tyrant called the guard, held forth a picture of horror, to which 
murder, theft, fraud, and peculation, lent all their dark colouring. 
But that which gratifies the impatience of the human disposition 
will be practised in the teeth of danger, and in defiance of admoni- 
tion ; and, in despite of the Cambrian antiquary, mail-coaches not 
only roll their thunders r6und the base of Penman-Maur and 
Cader-Edris, but 

Frighted' Skiddaw hears afar the rattling of the unscythed car. 

And perhaps the echoes of Ben Nevis may soon be awakened by 
the bugle, not of a warlike chieftain, but of the guard of a mail- 
coach. 

It was a fine summer day, and our little school had obtained a 
half holiday, by the intercession of a. good-humoured visitor.* I 
expected by the coach a new number of an interesting periodical 
publication, and walked forward on the highway to meet it, with 
the impatience which Cowper has described as actuating the 
resident in the country when longing for intelligence from the mart 
of news : 

" The grand debate, 

The popular harangue, — the tart reply, — 
The logic, and the wisdom, and the wit, 
And the loud laugh, — I long to know them all ;— 
I burn to set the imprison'd wranglers free, 
And give them voice and utterance again." 

It was with such feelings that I eyed the approach of the new 
coach, lately established on our road, and known by the name of 
the Somerset, which, to say truth, possesses some interest for me, 
even when it conveys no such important information. The distant 
tremulous sound of its wheels was heard just as I gained the 
summit of the gentle ascent, called the Goslin-brae, from which you 
command an extensive view down the valley of the river Gander. 
The public road, which comes up the side of that stream, and 
crosses it at a bridge about a quarter of a mile from the place 
where I was standing, runs partly through enclosures and planta- 
tions, and partly through open pasture land. It is a childish 
amusement perhaps, — but my life has been spent with children, 
and why should not my pleasures be like theirs ? — childish as it is 
then, I must own I have had great pleasure in watching the ap- 
proach of the carriage, where the openings of the rpad permit it to 



e6 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

be seen. The gay glancing of the equipage, its diminished and 
toy-like appearance at a distance, contrasted with the rapidity of 
its motion, its appearance and disappearance at intervals, and the 
progressively increasing sounds, that announce its nearer approach, 
have all to the idle and listless spectator, who has nothing more 
important to attend to, something of awakening interest. The 
ridicule may attach to me, which is flung upon many an honest 
citizen, who watches from the window of his villa the passage of 
the stage-coach ; but it is a very natural source of amusement not- 
withstanding, and many of those who join in the laugh are perhaps 
not unused to resort to it in secret. 

On the present occasion, however, fate had decreed that I should 
not enjoy the consummation of the amusement by seeing the coach 
rattle past me as I sat on the turf, and hearing the hoarse grating 
voice of the guard as he skimmed forth for my grasp the expected 
packet, without the carriage checking its course for an instant. I 
had seen the vehicle thunder down the hill that leads to' the bridge 
with more than its usual impetuosity, glittering all the while by- 
flashes from a cloudy tabernacle of the dust which it had raised, 
and leaving a train behind it on the road resembling a wreath of 
summer mist. But it did not appear on the top of the nearer bank 
within the usual space of three minutes, which frequent observation 
had enabled me to ascertain was the medium time for crossing the 
bridge and mounting the ascent. When double that space had 
elapsed, I became alarmed, and walked hastily forward. As I 
came in sight of the bridge, the cause of delay was too manifest, 
for the Somerset had made a summerset in good earnest, and 
overturned so completely, that it was literally resting upon the 
ground, with the roof undermost, and the four wheels in the air. 
The " exertions of the guard and coachman," both of whom were 
gratefully commemorated in the newspapers, having succeeded in 
disentangling the horses by cutting the harness, were now proceed- 
ing to extricate the insides by a sort of summary and Csesarean 
process of delivery, forcing the hinges from one of the doors which 
they could not open otherwise, In this manner were two discon- 
solate damsels set at liberty from the womb of the leathern conve- 
nience As they immediately began to settle their clothes, which 
were a little deranged, as may be presumed, I concluded they had 
received no injury, and did not venture to obtrude my services at 
their toilette, for which, I understand, I have since been reflected 
upon by the fair sufferers. The outsides, who must have been 
discharged from their elevated situation by a shock resembling the 
springing of a mine, escaped, nevertheless, with the usual allowance 
of scratches and bruises, excepting three, who, having been pitched 
into the river Gander, were dimly seen contending with the tide, 
like the relics of ^Eneas's shipwreck, — 

Rari a-pparent nantes in gurgite vasto. 

I applied my poor exertions where they seemed to be most 
needed, and with the assistance of one or two of the company who 
had escaped unhurt, easily succeeded in fishing out two of the 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 17 

unfortunate passengers, who were stout active young fellows ; and, 
but for the preposterous length of their great-coats, and the equally 
fashionable latitude and longitude of their Wellington trousers, 
would have required little assistance from any one. The third was 
sickly and elderly, and might have perished but for the efforts 
used to preserve him. 

When the two great-coated gentlemen had extricated themselves 
from the river, and shaken their ears like huge water-dogs, a violent 
altercation ensued betwixt them and the coachman and guard, 
concerning the cause of their overthrow. In the course of the 
squabble, I observed that both my new acquaintances belonged to 
the law, and that their professional sharpness was likely to prove 
an overmatch for the surly and official tone of the guardians of the 
vehicle. The dispute ended in the guard assuring the passengers 
that they should have seats in a heavy coach which would pass 
that spot in less than half an hour, provided it were not full. Chance 
seemed to favour this arrangement, for when the expected vehicle 
arrived, there were only two places occupied in a carriage which 
professed to carry six. The two ladies who had been disinterred 
out of the fallen vehicle were readily admitted, but positive objec- 
tions were stated by those previously in possession to the admit- 
tance of the two lawyers, whose wetted garments being much of 
the nature of well-soaked sponges, there was every reason to 
believe they would refund a considerable part of the water they had 
collected, to the inconvenience of their fellow-passengers. On the 
other hand, the lawyers rejected a seat on the roof, alleging that 
they had only taken that station for pleasure for one stage, but 
were entitled in all respects to free egress and regress from the 
interior, to which their contract positively referred. After some 
altercation, in which something was said upon the edict Natitce 
caupones stabularii, the coach went off, leaving the learned gentle- 
men to abide by their action of damages. 

They immediately applied to me to guide them to the next 
village and the best inn ; and from the account I gave them of the 
Wallace-Head, declared they were much better pleased to stop 
there than to go forward upon the terms of that impudent scoundrel 
the guard of the Somerset. All that they now wanted was a lad 
to carry their travelling bags, who was easily procured from an ad- 
joining cottage ; and they prepared to walk forward, when they 
found there was another passenger in the same deserted situation 
with themselves. This was the elderly and sickly looking person, 
who had been precipitated into the river along with the two young- 
lawyers. He, it seems, had been too modest to push his own plea 
against the coachman when he saw that of his betters rejected, and 
now remained behind, with a look of timid anxiety, plainly intimat- 
ing that he was deficient in those means of recommendation which 
are necessary passports to the hospitality of an inn. 

I ventured to call the attention of the two dashing young blades, 
for such they seemed, to the desolate, qondition of their fellow- 
traveller. They took the hint with ready good-nature. 

"O, true, Mr. Dunover," said one of the youngsters, " you must 

B 



18 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

not remain on the pave" here ; you must go and have some dinner 
with us — Hallrit and I must have a post-chaise to go on, at all 
events, and we will set you down wherever suits you best." 

The poor man, for such his dress, as well as his diffidence, be- 
spoke him, made the sort of acknowledging bow by which says a 
Scotsman, " It's too much honour for the like of me ; " and followed 
humbly behind his gay patrons, all three besprinkling the dusty 
road as they walked along with the moisture of their drenched 
garments, and exhibiting the singular and somewhat ridiculous 
appearance of three persons suffering from the opposite extreme 
of humidity,' while the summer sun was at its height, and every 
thing else around them had the expression of heat and drought. 
The ridicule did not escape the young gentlemen themselves, and 
they had" made what might be received as one or two tolerable 
jests on the subject before they had advanced far on their peregri- 
nation. 

" We cannot complain, like Cowley," said one of them, " that 
Gideon's fleece remains dry, while all around is moist ; this is the 
reverse of the miracle." 

" We ought to be received with gratitude in this good town ; we 
bring a supply of what they seem to need most," said Halkit. 

" And distribute it with unparalleled generosity," replied his com- 
panion ; " performing the part of three water-carts for the benefit 
of their dusty roads." 

" We come before them, too," said Halkit, " in full professional 
force — counsel and agent — " 

" And client," said the young advocate, looking behind him. 
And then added, lowering his voice, " that looks as if he had kept 
such dangerous company too long." 

It was, indeed, too true, that the humble follower of the gay 
young men had the threadbare appearance of a worn-out litigant, 
and 1 could not but smile at the conceit, though anxious to conceal 
my mirth from the object of it. 

When we arrived at the Wallace Inn, the elder of the Edinburgh 
gentlemen, and whom I understood to be a barrister, insisted that 
I should remain and take part of their dinner ; and their inquiries 
and demands speedily put my landlord and his whole family in 
motion to produce the best cheer which the larder and cellar 
afforded, and proceed to cook it to the best advantage — a science 
in which our entertainers seemed to be admirably skilled. In other 
respects they were lively young men, in the hey-day of youth and 
good spirits, playing the part which is common to the higher classes 
of the law at Edinburgh, and which nearly resembles that of the 
young Templars in the days of Steele and Addison. An air of 
giddy gaiety mingled with. the good sense, taste, and information 
which their conversation exhibited ; and it seemed to be their 
object "to unite the character of men of fashion and lovers of the 
polite arts. A fine gentleman, bred up in the thorough idleness and 
inanity of pursuit, which I understand is absolutely necessary to 
the character in perfection, might in all probability have traced a 
tinge of professional pedantry which marked the barrister in spite 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 19 

« - 
of his efforts, and something of active bustle in his companion, and 
would certainly have detected more than a fashionable mixture of 
information and animated interest in the language of both. But, 
to me, who had no pretensions to be so critical, my companions 
seemed to form a very happy mixture of good-breeding and liberal" 
information, with a disposition to lively rattle, pun, and jest; 
amusing to a grave man, because it is what he himself can leas( 
easily command. 

The thin pale-faced man, whom their good-nature had brought 
into their society, looked out of place as well as out of spirits ; sate 
on the edge of his seat, and kept the chair at two feet distance from 
the table ; thus incommoding himself considerably in conveying the 
victuals to his mouth, as if by way of penance for partaking of them 
in the company of his superiors. A short time after dinner, de- 
clining all entreaty to partake of the wine, which circulated freely 
round, he informed himself of the hour when the chaise had been 
ordered to attend ; and saying he would be in readiness, modestly 
withdrew from the apartment. 

" Jack," said the barrister to his companion, " I remember that 
poor fellow's face ; you spoke more truly than you were aware of ; 
he really is one of my clients, poor man." 

"Poor man !" echoed Halkit — " I suppose you mean he is your 
one and only client ? " 

" That's not my fault, Jack,'' replied the other, whose name I dis- 
covered was Hardie. "You are to give me all your business, you 
kriow ; and if you have none, the learned gentleman here knows 
nothing can come of nothing." 

" You seem to have brought something to nothing though, in the 
case of that honest man. He looks as if he were just about to 
honour with his residence the Heart of Mid-Lothian." 

" You are mistaken — he is just delivered from it. — Our friend 
here looks for an explanation. Pray, Mr. Pattieson, have you been 
in Edinburgh ? " 

I answered in the affirmative. 

" Then you must have passed, occasionally at least, though pro- 
bably not so -faithfully as I am doomed to do, through a narrow 
intricate passage, leading out of the north-west corner of the Parlia- 
ment Square, and passing by a high and antique building, with 
turrets and iron grates, 

Making good the saying odd, 

Near the church and far from God — " 

Mr. Halkit broke in upon his learned counsel, to contribute his 
moiety to the riddle — " Having at the door the sign of the Red 
Man " . 'i- 

" And being on the whole," resumed the counsellor, interrupt- 
ing his friend in his turn, " a sort of place where misfortune is 
happily confounded with guilt, where all who are in wish to get 
out " 

" And where none who have the good luck to be out, wish to get 
in," added his companion. 

b 2 



20 fHE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" I conceive you, gentlemen," replied I ; " you mean the prison." 

" The prison," added the young lawyer— "You have hit it— the 
very reverend Tolbooth itself ; and let me tell you, you are obliged 
to us for describing it with so much modesty and brevity ; for with 
whatever amplifications we might have chosen to decorate the 
subject, you lay entirely at our mercy, since the Fathers Conscript 
of our city have decreed, that the venerable edifice itself shall not 
remain in existence to confirm or to confute us." 

"Then the Tolbooth of Edinburgh is called the Heart of Mid- 
Lothian ? " said I. 

" So termed and reputed, I assure you." 

" I think," said I, with the bashful diffidence with which a man 
lets slip a pun in presence of his superiors, " the metropolitan 
county mav, in that case, be said to have a sad heart." 

" Right as my glove, Mr. Pattieson," added Mr. Hardie ; " and a 
close heart, and a hard heart — Keep it up, Jack." 

'• And a wicked heart, and a poor heart," answered Halkit, doing 
his best. 

" And yet it may be called in some sort a strong heart, and a 
high heart," rejoined the advocate. " You see I can put you both 
out of heart." 

" I have played all my hearts," said the younger gentleman. 

" Then we'll have another lead," answered his companion. — 
" And as to the old and condemned Tolbooth, what pity the same 
honour cannot be done to it as has been done to many of its in- 
mates. Why should not the Tolbooth have its ' Last Speech, Con- 
fession, and Dying Words?' The old stones would be just. as 
conscious of the honour as many a poor devil who has dangled like 
a tassel at the west end of it, while the hawkers were shouting a 
confession the culprit had never heard of." 

" I am afraid," said I, " if I might presume to give my opinion, it 
would be a tale of unvaried sorrow and guilt." 

" Not entirely, my friend," said Hardie ; " a prison is a world 
within itself, and has its own business, griefs, and joys, peculiar to 
its circle. Its inmates are sometimes short-lived, but so are soldiers 
on service ; they are poor relatively to the world without, but there 
are degrees of wealth and poverty among them, and so some are 
relatively rich also. They cannot stir abroad, but neither can the 
garrison of a besieged fort, or the crew of a ship at sea ; and they 
are not under a dispensation quite so desperate as eithea^for they 
may have as much food as they have money to buy, alid are not 
obliged to work, whether they have food or not." 

" But what variety of incident," said I, (not without a secret view 
to my present task,) " could possibly be derived from such a work 
as you are pleased to talk of?" 

" Infinite," replied the young advocate. " Whatever of gu%c»ime, 
imposture, folly, unheard-of misfortunes, and unlooked-for*change 
of fortune, can be found to chequer life, my Last Speech of the 
Tolbooth should illustrate with examples sufficient to gorge even 
the public's all-devouring appetite for the wonderful and horrible. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. ar 

to diversify his tale, and after all can hardly hit upon characters or 
incidents which have not been used again and again, until they are 
familiar to the eye of the reader, so that the development, enleve- 
ment, the desperate wound of which the hero never dies, the burn- 
ing fever from which the heroine is sure to recover, become a mere 
matter of course. I join with my honest friend Crabbe, and have 
an unlucky propensity to hope, when hope is lost, and to rely upon 
the cork-jacket, which carries the heroes of romance safe through 
all the billows of affliction." He then declaimed the following 
passage, rather with too much than too little emphasis : 

" Much have I feared, but am no more afraid, 

When some chaste beauty, by some wretch betray'd, 

Is drawn away with such distracted speed, 

That she anticipates a dreadful deed. 

Not so do I — Let solid walls impound 

The captive fair, and dig a moat around ; r 

Let there be brazen locks and bars of steel, 

And keepers cruel, such as never feel ; 

With not a single note the purse supply, 

And when she begs, let men and maids deny ; 

Be windows there from which she dares not fall, 

And help so distant, 'tis in vain to call ; 

Still means of freedom will some Power devise, 

And from the baffled ruffian snatch his prize." 

" The end of uncertainty," he concluded, " is the death of inte- 
rest ; and hence it happens that no one now reads novels." 

" Hear him, ye gods ! " returned his companion. " I assure you, 
Mr. Pattieson, you will hardly visit this learned gentleman, but you 
are likely to find the new novel most in repute lying on his table, — 
snugly intrenched, however, beneath Stair's Institutes, or an open 
volume of Morrison's Decisions." 

" Do I deny it ? " said the hopeful jurisconsult, " or wherefore 
should I, since it is well known these Dalilahs seduce my wisers 
and my betters ? May they not be found lurking amidst the multi- 
plied memorials of our most distinguished counsel, and even peep- 
ing from under the cushion of a judge's arm-chair? Our seniors at 
the bar, within the bar, and even on the bench, read novels ; and, 
if not belied, some of them have written novels into the bargain. I 
only say, that I read from habit and from indolence, not from real 
interest ; that, like Ancient Pistol devouring his leek, I read and 
swear till I get to the end of the narrative. But not so in the real 
records of human vagaries — not so in the State Trials, or in the 
Books of Adjournal, where every now and then you read new pages 
of the human heart, and turns of fortune far beyond what the 
boldest novelist ever attempted to produce from the coinage of his 
brain." 

" And for such narratives," I asked, " you suppose the History of 
the Prison of Edinburgh might afford appropriate materials?" 

" In a degree unusually ample, my dear sir," said Hardie — " Fill 
your glass, however, in the meanwhile. Was it not for many years 



22 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

the place in which the Scottish parliament met ? Was it not James's 
place of refuge, when the mob, inflamed by a seditious preacher, 
broke forth on him with the cries of ' The sword of the Lord and 
of Gideon— bring forth the wicked Haman ? ' Since that time how- 
many hearts have throbbed within these walls, as the tolling of the 
neighbouring bell announced to them how fast the sands of their 
life were ebbing ; how many must have sunk at the sound— how 
many were supported by stubborn pride and dogged resolution — 
how many by the consolations of religion ? Have there not been 
some, who, looking back on the motives of their crimes, were scarce 
able to understand how they should have had such temptation as to 
seduce them from virtue ? and have there not, perhaps, been others, 
who, sensible of their innocence, were divided between indignation 
at the undeserved doom which they were to undergo, consciousness 
that they had not deserved it, and racking anxiety to discover some 
way in which they might yet vindicate themselves ? Do you suppose 
any of these deep, powerful, and agitating feelings, can be recorded 
and perused without exciting a corresponding depth of deep, power- 
ful, and agitating interest ?— O ! do but wait till I publish the 
Causes CeRbres of Caledonia, and you will find no want of a novel 
or a tragedy for some time to come. The true thing will triumph 
over the brightest inventions of the most ardent imagination. 
Magna est Veritas, et pnzvalebit." 

"' I have understood," said I, encouraged by the affability of my 
rattling entertainer, "that less of this interest must attach to 
Scottish jurisprudence than to that of any other country. The 
general morality of our people, their sober and prudent habits " 

" Secure them," said the barrister, " against any great increase of 
professional- thieves and depredators, but, not against wild and 
wayward starts of fancy and passion, producing crimes of an extra- 
ordinary description, which are precisely those to the detail of 
which we listen with thrilling interest. England has been much 
longer a highly civilized country; her subjects have been very 
strictly amenable to laws administered without fear or favour, a 
complete division of labour has taken place among her subjects, 
and the very thieves and robbers form a distinct class in society, 
subdivided among themselves according to the subject of their de- 
predations, and the mode in which they carry them on, acting upon 
regular habits and principles, which can be calculated and antici- 
pated at Bow Street, Hatton Garden, or the Old Bailey. Our 
sister kingdom is like a cultivated field, — the farmer expects that, 
in spite of all his care, a certain number of weeds will rise with the 
corn, and can tell you beforehand their names and appearance. 
But Scotland is like one of her own Highland glens, and the 
moralist who reads the records of her criminal jurisprudence, will 
find as many curious anomalous facts in the history of mind, as 
the botanist will detect rare specimens among her dingles 
and cliffs." 

" And that's all the good you have obtained from three perusals 
of the Commentaries on Scottish Criminal Jurisprudence?" said 
his companion. " I suppose the learned author very little thinks 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 23 

that the facts which his erudition and acuteness have accumulated 
for the illustration of legal doctrines, might be so arranged as to 
form a sort of appendix to the half-bound and slip-shod volumes 
of the circulating library." 

" I'll bet you a pint of claret," said the elder lawyer, " that he 
will not feel sore at the comparison. But as we say at the bar, ' I 
beg I may not be interrupted ; ' I have much more to say, upon my 
Scottish collection of Causes Cdlebres. You will please recollect 
the scope and motive given for the contrivance and execution of 
many extraordinary and daring crimes, by the long civil dissensions 
of Scotland— by the hereditary jurisdictions, which, until 1748, 
rested the investigation of crimes in judges, ignorant, partial, or 
interested — by the habits of the gentry, shut up in their distant and 
solitary mansion-houses, nursing their revengeful passions just to 
keep their blood from stagnating — not to mention that amiable 
national qualification, called the perfervidum ingenium Scotorttm, 
which our lawyers join in alleging as a reason for the severity of 
some of our enactments. When I come to treat of matters so 
mysterious, deep, and dangerous, as these circumstances have 
given rise to, the blood of each reader shall be curdled, and his 
epidermis crisped into goose skin. — But, hist! — here comes the 
landlord, with tidings, I suppose, that the chaise is ready." 

It was no such thing — the tidings bore, that no chaise could be 
had that evening, for Sir Peter Plyem had carried forward my 
landlord's two pairs of horses that morning to the ancient royal 
borough of Bubbleburgh, to look after his interest there. But as 
Bubbleburgh is only one of a set of five boroughs which club their 
shares for a member of parliament, Sir Peter's adversary had 
judiciously watched his departure, in order to commence a canvass 
in the no less royal borough of Bitem, which, as all the world 
knows, lies at the very termination of Sir Peter's avenue, and has 
been held in leading strings by him and his ancestors for time im- 
memorial. Now Sir Peter was thus placed in the situation of an 
ambitious monarch, who, after having commenced a daring inroad 
into his enemy's territories, is suddenly recalled by an invasion of 
his own hereditary dominions. He was obliged in consequence to 
return from the half-won borough of Bubbleburgh, to look after the 
half-lost borough of Bitem, and the two pairs of horses which had 
carried him that morning to Bubbleburgh, were now forcibly 
detained to transport him, his agent, his valet, his jester, and his 
hard-drinker, across the country to Bitem. The cause of this de- 
tention, which to me was of as little consequence as it may be to 
the reader, was important enough to my companions to reconcile 
them to the delay. Like eagles, they smelled the battle afar off, 
ordered a magnum of claret and beds at the Wallace, and entered 
at full career into the Bubbleburgh and Bitem politics, with all the 
probable " petitions and complaints " to which they were likely to 
give rise. 

In the midst of an anxious, animated, and, to me, most un- 
intelligible discussion, concerning provosts, bailies, deacons, sets of 
boroughs, leets, town-clerks, burgesses resident and non-resident, 



24 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

all of a sudden the lawyer recollected himself. " Poor Dunover, 
we must not forget him ; " and the landlord was despatched in 
quest of the pauvre honteux, with an earnestly civil invitation to 
him for the rest of the evening. I could not help asking the young 
gentlemen if they knew the history of this poor man ; and the 
counsellor applied himself to his pocket to recover the memorial 
or brief from which he had stated his cause. 

" He has been a candidate for our remedium miserabile," said 
Mr. Hardie, " commonly called a cessio bonorum. As there are 
divines who have doubted the eternity of future punishments, so 
the Scotch lawyers seem to have thought that the crime of poverty 
might be atoned for by something short of perpetual imprison- 
ment. After a month's confinement, you must know, a prisoner 
for debt is entitled, on a sufficient statement to our Supreme 
Court, setting forth the amount of his funds, and the nature of 
his misfortunes, and surrendering all his effects to his creditors, to 
claim to be discharged from prison." 

" I had heard," I replied, " of such a humane regulation." 

" Yes," said Halkit, " and the beauty of it is, as the foreign 
fellow said, you may get the cessio when the bonorums are all spent 
— But what, are you puzzling in your pockets to seek your only 
memorial among old play-bills, letters requesting a meeting of the 
Faculty, rules of the Speculative Society, syllabus' of lectures- 
all the miscellaneous contents of a young advocate's pocket, 
which contains every thing but briefs and bank notes ? Can you 
not state a case of cessio without your memorial ? Why it is done 
every Saturday. The events follow each other as regularly as 
clock-work, and one form of condescendence might suit every one 
of them." 

" This is very unlike the variety of distress which this gentleman 
stated to fall under the consideration of your judges," said I. 

" True," replied Halkit ; " but Hardie spoke of criminal juris- 
prudence, and this business is purely civil. I could plead a cessio 
myself without the inspiring honours of a gown and three-tailed 
periwig — Listen. — My client was bred a journeyman weaver — made 
some little money — took a farm — (for conducting a farm, like 
driving a gig, comes by nature) — late severe times — induced to sign 
bills with a friend, for which he received no value — landlord 
sequestrates — creditors accept a composition — pursuer sets up a 
public-house — fails a second time — is incarcerated for a debt of ten 
pounds seven shillings and sixpence — his debts amount to blank — 
his losses to blank — his funds to blank — leaving a balance of blank 
in his favour. There is no opposition ; your lordships will please 
grant commission to take his oath." ' 

Hardie now renounced this ineffectual search, in which there 
was perhaps a little affectation, and told us the tale of poor 
Dunover's distresses, with a tone in which a degree of feeling, 
which he seemed ashamed of as unprofessional, mingled with his 
attempts at wit, and did him more honour. It was one of those 
tales which seem to argue a sort of ill-luck or fatality attached to 
the hero. A well-informed, industrious, and blameless, but poor 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. i S 

and bashful man, had in vain essayed all the usual means by which 
others acquire independence, yet had never succeeded beyond the 
attainment of bare subsistence. During a brief gleam of hope, 
rather than of actual prosperity, he had added a wife and family to 
his cares, but the dawn was speedily overcast. Every thing retro- 
graded with him towards the verge of the miry Slough of Despond, 
which yawns for insolvent debtors ; and after catching at each 
twig, and experiencing the protracted agony of feeling them one by 
one elude his grasp, he actually sunk into the miry pit whence he 
had been extricated by the professional exertions of Hardie. 

" And, I suppose, now you have dragged this poor devil ashore, 
you will leave him half naked on the beach to provide for him- 
self?" said Halkit. "Hark ye," — and he whispered something in 
his ear, of which the penetrating and insinuating words, " Interest 
with my Lord," alone reached mine. 

" It is pessimi exempli? said Hardie, laughing, " to provide for 
a ruined client ; but I was thinking of what you mention, provided 
it can be managed — But hush ! here he comes." 

The recent relation of the poor man's misfortunes had given 
him, I was pleased to observe, a claim to the attention and respect 
of the young men, who treated him with great civility, and 
gradually engaged him in a conversation, which, much to my 
satisfaction, again turned upon the Causes Cilibres of Scotland. 
Imboldened by the kindness with which he was treated, Mr. Dun- 
over began to contribute his share to the amusement of the 
evening. Jails, like other places, have their ancient traditions, 
known only to the inhabitants, and handed down from one set 
of the melancholy lodgers to the next who occupy their cells. 
Some of these, which Dunover mentioned, were interesting, and 
served to illustrate the narratives of remarkable trials, which 
Hardie had at his finger ends, and which his companion was also 
well skilled in. This sort of conversation passed away the evening 
till the early hour when Mr. Dunover chose to retire to rest, and I 
also retreated to take down memorandums of what I had learned, 
in order to add another narrative to those which it had been my 
chief amusement to collect, and to write out in detail. The two 
young men ordered a broiled bone, Madeira negus, and a pack of 
cards, and commenced a game at picquet. 

Next morning the travellers left Gandercleugh. I afterwards 
learned from the papers that both have been since engaged in the 
great political cause of Bubbleburgh and Bitem, a summary case, 
and entitled to particular despatch ; but which, it is thought, never- 
theless, may outlast the duration of the parliament to which the 
contest refers. Mr. Halkit, as the newspapers informed me, acts 
as agent or solicitor ; and Mr. Hardie opened for Sir Peter Plyem 
with singular ability, and to such good purpose, that I understand 
he has since had fewer play-bills and more briefs in his pocket. 
And both the young gentlemen deserve their good fortune ; for I 
learned from Dunover, who called on me some weeks afterwards, 
and communicated the intelligence with tears in his eyes, that their 
interest had availed to obtain him a small office for the decent 



26 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

maintenance of his family ; and that, after a train of constant and 
uninterrupted misfortune, he could trace a dawn of prosperity to 
his having the good fortune to be flung from the top of a mail- 
coach into the river Gander, in company with an advocate and a 
writer to the signet. The readar will not perhaps deem himself 
equally obliged to the accident, since it brings upon him the 
following narrative, founded upon the conversation of the evening. 



CHAPTER II. 

Whoe'er's been at Paris must needs know the Greve, 
The fatal retreat of the unfortunate brave, 
Where honour and justice most oddly contribute, 
To ease heroes' pains by an halter and gibbet. 

There'death breaks the shackles which force had put on, 
And the hangman completes what the judge but began ; 
There the squire of the poet, and knight of the post, 
Find their pains no more baulk'd, and their hopes no more cross'd. 

Prior. 

In former times, England had her Tyburn, to which the devoted 
victims of justice were conducted in solemn procession up what is 
now called Oxford-Road. In Edinburgh, a large open street, or 
rather oblong square,-surrounded by high houses, called the Grass- 
market, was used for the same melancholy purpose. It was not ill 
chosen for such a scene, being of considerable extent, and there- 
fore fit to accommodate a great number of spectators, such as are 
usually assembled by this melancholy spectacle. On the other 
hand, few of the houses which surround it were, even in> early 
times, inhabited by persons of fashion ; so that those likely to be 
offended or over deeply affected by such unpleasant exhibitions 
were not in the way of having their quiet disturbed by them. The 
houses in the Grassmarket are, generally speaking, of a mean 
description ; yet the place is not without some features of grandeur, 
being overhung by the southern side of the huge rock on which 
the castle stands, and by the moss-grown battlements and turreted 
walls of that ancient fortress. 

It w£ts the custom, until within these thirty years, or thereabouts, 
to use this esplanade for the scene of public executions. The 
fatal day was announced to the public, by the appearance of a 
huge black gallows-tree towards the eastern end of the Grass- 
market. This ill-omened apparition was of great height, with a 
scaffold surrounding it, and a double ladder placed against it, for 
the ascent of the unhappy criminal and executioner. As this 
apparatus was always arranged before dawn, it seemed as if the 
gallows had grown out of the earth in the course of one night, like 
the production of some foul demon ; and I well remember the 
fright with which the school-boys, when I was one of their number, 
used to regard these ominous signs of deadly preparation. On the 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 27 

night after the execution the gallows again disappeared, and was 
conveyed in silence and darkness to the place where it was usually 
deposited, which was one of the vaults under the Parliament-house, 
or courts of justice. This mode of execution is now exchanged for 
one similar to that in front of Newgate, — with what beneficial effect 
is uncertain. The mental sufferings of the convict are indeed 
shortened. He no longer stalks between the attendant clergy- 
men, dressed in his grave-clothes, through a considerable part of 
the city, looking like a moving and walking corpse, while yet an 
inhabitant of this world ; but, as the ultimate purpose of punish- 
ment has in view the prevention of crimes, it may at least be 
doubted, whether, in abridging the melancholy ceremony, we have 
not in part diminished that appalling effect upon the spectators 
which is the useful end of all such inflictions, and in considera- 
tion of which alone, unless in very particular cases, capital sen- 
tences can be altogether justified. 

On the 7th day of September, 1736, these ominous preparations 
for execution were descried in the place we have described, and at 
an early hour the space around began to be occupied by several 
groups, who gazed on the scaffold and gibbet with a stern and vin- 
dictive show of satisfaction very seldom testified by the populace, 
whose good nature, in most cases, forgets the crime of the con- 
demned person, and dwells only on his misery. But the act of 
which the expected culprit had been convicted was of a description 
calculated nearly and closely to awaken and irritate the resentful 
feelings of the multitude. The tale is well known ; yet it is neces- 
sary to recapitulate its leading circumstances, for the better under- 
standing what is to follow ; and the narrative may prove long, but 
I trust not uninteresting, even to those who have heard its general 
issue. At any rate some detail is necessary, in order to render in- 
telligible the subsequent events of our narrative. 

Contraband trade, though it strikes at the root of legitimate 
government, by encroaching on its revenues, — though it injures the 
fair trader, and debauches the mind of those engaged in it, — is not 
usually looked upon, either by the vulgar or by their betters, in a 
very heinous point' of view. On the contrary, in those counties 
where it prevails, the cleverest, boldest, and most intelligent of the 
peasantry, are uniformly engaged in illicit transactions, and very 
.often with the sanction of the farmers and inferior gentry. .Smug- 
gling was almost universal in Scotland in the reigns of George I. 
and II.; for the people, unaccustomed to imposts, and regarding 
them as an unjust aggression upon their ancient liberties, made no ' 
scruple to elude them whenever it was possible to do so. 

The county of Fife, bounded by two firths on the south and north, 
and by the sea on the east, and having a number of small seaports, 
was long famed for maintaining successfully a contraband trade ; 
and, as there were many seafaring men residing there, who had 
been pirates and buccaneers in their youth, there were not wanting 
a sufficient number of daring men to carry it on. Among these, a 
fellow, called Andrew-Wilson, originally a baker in the village of 
Pathhead, was particularly obnoxious to the revenue officers. He 



28 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

was possessed of great personal strength, courage, and cunning, 
was perfectly acquainted with the coast, and capable of conducting 
the most desperate enterprises. On several occasions he succeeded 
in baffling the pursuit and researches of the king's officers ; but he 
became so much the object of their suspicions and watchful atten- 
tion, that at length he was totally ruined by repeated seizures. The 
man became desperate. He considered himself as robbed and 
plundered ; and took it into his head, that he had a right to make 
reprisals, as he could find opportunity. Where the heart is pre- 
pared for evil, opportunity is seldom long wanting. This Wilson 
learned, that the Collector of the Customs at Kirkaldy had come to 
Pittenweem, in the course of his official round of duty, with a con- 
siderable sum of public money in his custody. As the amount was 
greatly within the value of the goods which had been seized from 
him, Wilson felt no scruple of conscience in resolving to reimburse 
himself for his losses, at the expense of the Collector and the reve- 
nue. He associated with himself one Robertson, and two other 
idle young men, whom, having been concerned in the same illicit 
trade, he persuaded to view the transaction in the same justifiable 
light in which he himself considered it. They watched the motions 
of the Collector; they broke forcibly into the house where he 
lodged, — Wilson, with two of his associates, entering the Collector's 
apartment, while Robertson, the fourth, kept watch at the door with 
a drawn cutlass in his hand. The officer of the customs, conceiv- 
ing his life in danger, escaped out of his bedro6m window, and fled 
in his shirt, so that the plunderers, with much ease, possessed them- 
selves of about two hundred pounds of public money. The robbery 
was committed in a very audacious manner, for several persons 
were passing in the street at the time. But Robertson, representing 
the noise they heard as a dispute or fray betwixt the Collector and 
the people of the house, the worthy citizens of Pittenweem felt 
themselves no way called on to interfere in behalf of the obnoxious 
revenue officer ; so, satisfying themselves with this very superficial 
account of the matter, like the Levite in the parable, they passed on 
the opposite side of the way. An alarm was at length given, military 
were called in, the depredators were pursued, the booty recovered, 
and Wilson and Robertson tried and condemned to death, chiefly 
on the evidence of an accomplice. 

Many thought, that, in consideration of the men's erroneous 
opinion of the nature of the action they had committed, justice 
might have been satisfied with a less forfeiture than that of two 
lives. On the other hand, from the audacity of the fact, a severe 
example was judged necessary ; and such was the opinion of the 
government. When it became apparent that the sentence of death 
was to be executed, files, and other implements necessary for their 
escape, were transmitted secretly to the culprits by a friend from 
without. By these means they sawed a bar out of one of the prison 
windows, and might have made their escape, but for the obstinacy 
of Wilson, who, as he was daringly resolute, was doggedly pertina- 
cious of his opinion. His comrade, Robertson, a young and slender 
man, proposed to make the experiment of passing the foremost 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 29 

through the gap they had made; and enlarging it from the outside, 
if necessary, to allow Wilson free passage. Wilson, however, in- 
sisted on making the first experiment, and being a robust and lusty 
man, he not only found it impossible to get through betwixt the 
bars, but, by his struggles, he jammed himself so fast, that he was 
unable to draw his body back again. In these circumstances dis- 
covery became unavoidable, and sufficient precautions were taken 
by the jailor to prevent any repetition of the same attempt. 
Robertson uttered not a word of reflection on his companion for 
the consequences of his obstinacy ; but it appeared from the sequel, 
that Wilson's mind was deeply impressed with the recollection, 
that, but for him, his comrade, over whose mind he exercised con- 
siderable influence, would not have engaged in the criminal enter- 
prise which had terminated thus fatally ; and that now he had 
become his destroyer a second time, since, but for his obstinacy, 
Robertson might have effected his escape. Minds like Wilson's, 
even when exercised in evil practices, sometimes retain the power 
of thinking and resolving with enthusiastic generosity. His whole 
thoughts were now bent on the possibility of saving Robertson's 
life, without the least respect to his own. The resolution which he 
adopted, and the manner in which he carried it into effect were 
striking and unusual. 

Adjacent to the tolbooth, or city jail of Edinburgh, is one of three 
churches into which the cathedral of St. Giles is now divided, 
called, from its vicinity, the Tolbooth Church. It was the custom, 
that criminals under sentence of death, were brought to this church, 
with a sufficient guard, to hear and join in public worship on the 
Sabbath before execution. It was supposed that the hearts of 
these unfortunate persons, however hardened before against feel- 
ings of devotion, could not but be accessible to them upon uniting 
their thoughts and voices, for the last time, along with their fellow- 
mortals, in addressing their Creator. And to the rest of the con- 
gregation, it was thought it could not but be impressive and affect- 
ing, to find their devotions mingling with those who, sent by the 
doom of an earthly tribunal to appear where the whole earth is 
judged, might be considered as beings trembling on the verge of 
eternity. The practice, however edifying, has been discontinued, 
in consequence of the incident we are about to detail. 

The clergyman, whose duty it was to officiate in the Tolbooth 
Church, had concluded an affecting discourse, part of which was 
particularly directed to the unfortunate men, Wilson and Robertson, 
who were in the pew set apart for the persons in their unhappy 
situation, each secured betwixt two soldiers of the city guard. The 
clergyman had reminded them, that the next congregation they 
must join would be that of the just, or of the unjust : that the 
psalms they now heard must be exchanged, in the space of two 
brief days, for eternal hallelujahs, or eternal lamentations ; and that 
this fearful alternative must depend upon the siate to which they 
might be able to bring their minds before the moment of awful 
preparation : that they should not despair on account of the sud- 
denness of the summons, but rather to feel this comfort in their 



3o THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

misery, that, though all who now lifted the voice, or bent the knee 
in conjunction with them, lay under the same sentence of certain 
death, they only had the advantage of knowing the precise moment 
at which it should be executed upon them. " Therefore," urged the 
good man, his voice trembling with emotion, " redeem the time, my 
unhappy brethren, which is yet left ; and remember, that, with the 
grace of him to whom space and time are but as nothing, salvation 
may yet be assured, even in the pittance of delay which the laws of 
your country afford you." 

Robertson was observed to weep at these words ; but Wilson 
seemed as one whose brain had not entirely received their meaning, 
or whose thoughts were deeply impressed with some different sub- 
ject, — an expression so natural to a person in his situation, that it 
excited neither suspicion nor surprise. 

The benediction was pronounced as usual, and the congregation 
was dismissed, many lingering to indulge their curiosity with a more 
fixed look at the two criminals, who now, as well as their guards, 
rose up, as if to" depart when the crowd should permit them. A 
murmur of compassion was heard to pervade the spectators, the 
more general, perhaps, on account of the alleviating circumstances 
of the case ; when all at once, Wilson, who, as we have already 
noticed, was a very strong man, seized two of the soldiers, one with 
each hand, and calling at the same time to his companion, " Run, 
Geordie, run ! " threw Himself on a third, and fastened his teeth on 
the collar of his coat. Robertson stood for a second as if thunder- 
struck, and unable to avail himself of the opportunity, of escape ; 
but the cry of " Run, run ! " being echoed from many around, 
whose feelings surprised them into a very natural interest in his 
behalf, he shook off the grasp of the remaining soldier, threw him- 
self over the pew, mixed with the dispersing congregation, none of 
whom felt inclined to stop a poor wretch taking his last chance for 
his life, gained the door of the church, and was lost to all pursuit. 

The generous intrepidity which Wilson had displayed on this 
occasion augmented the feeling of compassion which attended his 
fate. The public, where their own prejudices are not concerned, 
are easily engaged on the side of disinterestedness and humanity, 
admired Wilson's behaviour, and rejoiced in Robertson's escape. 
This general feeling was so great, that it excited a vague report 
that Wilson would be rescued at the place of execution, either by 
the mob or by some of his old associates, or by some second extra- 
ordinary and unexpected exertion of strength and courage on his 
own part. The magistrates thought it their duty to provide against 
the possibility of disturbance. They ordered out, for protection of 
the execution of the sentence, the greater part of their own City 
Guard, under the command of Captain Porteous, a man whose 
name became too memorable from the melancholy circumstances 
of the day, and subsequent events. It may be necessary to say a 
word about this person, and the corps which he commanded. Bu* 
the subject is of importance sufficient to deserve another chapter. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 31 



CHAPTER III. 

And thou, great god of aqua-vitae ! 
Wha sways the empire of this city, 
(When fou we're sometimes capernoity,) , 

Be thou prepared, 
To save us frae that black banditti, 

The City Guard ! 

Ferguson's Daft Days. 

Captain John Porteous, a name memorable in the traditions 
of Edinburgh, as well as in the records of criminal jurisprudence, 
was the son of a citizen of Edinburgh, who endeavoured to breed 
him up to his own mechanical trade of a tailor. The youth, how- 
■ever, had a wild and irreclaimable propensity to dissipation, which 
finally sent him to serve in the corps long maintained in the service 
■of the States of Holland, and called the Scotch Dutch. Here he 
learned military discipline ; and returning afterwards, in the course 
of an idle and wandering life, to his native city, his services were 
required by the magistrates of Edinburgh in the disturbed year 
1715, for disciplining their City Guard, in which he shortly after- 
wards received a captain's commission. It was only by his military 
skill, and an alert and resolute character as an officer of police, 
that he merited this promotion, for he is said to have been a man 
■of profligate habits, an unnatural son, and a brutal husband. He 
was, however, useful in his station, and his harsh and fierce habits 
Tendered him formidable to rioters or disturbers of the public peace. 

The corps in which he held his command is, or perhaps we should 
Tather say was, a body of about one hundred and twenty soldiers, 
■divided into three companies, and regularly armed, clothed, and 
embodied. They were chiefly veterans who enlisted in this corps, 
having the benefit of working at their trades when they were off 
■duty. These men had the charge of preserving public order, re- 
pressing riots and street robberies, acting, in short, as an armed 
police, and attending on all public occasions where confusion or 
popular disturbance might be expected.* Poor Ferguson, whose 
irregularities sometimes led him into unpleasant rencontres with 
these military conservators of public order, and who mentions them 
so often that he may be termed their poet laureate, thus admonishes 
Jiis readers, warned doubtless by his own experience : 

" Gude folk, as ye come frae the fair, 
Bide yont frae this black squad ; 
There's nae sic savages elsewhere 
Allow'd to wear cockad." 

In fact, the soldiers of the City Guard, being, as we have said, in 
;general discharged veterans, who had strength enough remaining 
for this municipal duty, and being, moreover, for the greater part, 
Highlanders, were neither by birth, education, or former habits, 



32 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

trained to endure with much patience the insults of the rabble, or 
tne provoking petulance of truant schoolboys, and idle debauchees 
of all descriptions, with whom their occupation brought them into 
contact. On the contrary, the tempers of the poor old fellows were 
soured by the indignities with which the mob distinguished them 
on many occasions, and frequently might have required the soothing 
strains of the poet we have just quoted — 

" O soldiers ! for your ain dear sakes, 
For Scotland's love, the Land o' Cakes, 
Gie not her bairns sic deadly paiks, 

Nor be sae rude, 
Wi' firelock or Lochaber-axe, 

As spill their bluid ! " 

On all occasions when a holyday licensed some riot and irregu- 
larity, a skirmish with these veterans was a favourite recreation 
with the rabble of Edinburgh. These pages may perhaps see the 
light when many have in fresh recollection such onsets as we allude 
to. But the venerable corps, with whom the contention was held, 
may now be considered as totally extinct. Of late the gradual 
diminution of these civic soldiers, reminds one of the abatement of 
King Lear's hundred knights. The edicts of each succeeding set 
of magistrates have, like those of Goneril and Regan, diminished 
this venerable band with the similar question, " What need we 
five-and-twenty ?— ten ?— or five ?" And it is now nearly come to, 
" What need one ?" A spectre may indeed here and there still be 
seen, of an old grey-headed and grey-bearded Highlander, with 
war-worn features, but bent double by age ; dressed in an old- 
fashioned cocked-hat, bound with white tape instead of silver lace ; • 
and in coat, waistcoat, and breeches of a muddy-coloured red, 
bearing in his withered hand an ancient weapon, called a Lochaber- 
axe ; a long pole, namely, with an axe at the extremity, and a hook 
at the back of the hatchet* Such a phantom of former days still 
creeps, I have been informed, round the statue of Charles the 
Second, in the Parliament Square, as if the image of a Stewart 
were the last refuge for any memorial of our ancient manners ; and 
one or two others are supposed to glide around the door of the 
guard-house assigned to them in the Luckenbooths, when their 
ancient refuge in the High Street was laid low.* But the fate of 
manuscripts bequeathed to friends and executors is so uncertain,, 
that the narrative containing these frail memorials of the old Town- 
Guard of Edinburgh, who, with their grim and valiant corporal, 
John Dhu, (the fiercest-looking fellow I ever saw,) were, in my 
boyhood, the alternate terror and derision of the petulant brood of 
the High-school, may, perhaps, only come to light when all memory 
of the institution has faded away, and then serve as an illustration 
of Kay's caricatures, who has preserved the features of some of 
their heroes. In the preceding generation, when there was a per- 
petual alarm for the plots and activity of the Jacobites, some pains 
were taken by the magistrates of Edinburgh to keep this corps, 
though composed always of such materials as we have noticed, in a 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 33 

more effective state than was afterwards judged necessary, when 
their most dangerous service was to skirmish with the rabble on 
the king's birth-day. They were, therefore, more the objects of 
hatred, and less that of scorn, than they were afterwards accounted. 

To Captain John Porteous, the honour of his command and of his 
corps seems to have been a matter of high interest and importance. 
He was exceedingly incensed against Wilson for the affront which 
he construed him to have put upon his soldiers, in the effort he made 
for the liberation of his companion, and expressed himself most 
ardently on the subject. He was no less indignant at the report, 
that there was an intention to rescue Wilson himself from the 
gallows, andutteredmanythreats and imprecations upon thatsubject, 
which were afterwards remembered to his disadvantage. In fact, 
if a good deal of determination and promptitude rendered Porteous, 
in one respect, fit to command guards designed to suppress popular 
commotion, he seems, on the other, to have been disqualified for a 
charge so delicate, by a hot and surly temper, always too ready to 
come to blows and violence ; a character void of principle ; and a 
disposition to regard the rabble, who seldom failed to regale him 
and his soldiers with some marks of their displeasure, as declared 
enemies, upon whom it was natural and justifiable that he should 
seek opportunities of vengeance. Being, however, the most active 
and trust-worthy among the captains of the City Guard, he was the 
person to whom the magistrates confided the command of the soldiers 
appointed to keep the peace at the time of Wilson's execution. He 
was ordered to guard the gallows and scaffold, with about eighty 
men, all the disposable force that could be spared for that duty. 

But the magistrates took farther precautions, which affected Por- 
teous's pride very deeply. They requested the assistance of part of 
a regular infantry regiment, not to attend upon the execution, but 
to remain drawn up on the principal street of the city during the 
time that it went forward, in order to intimidate the multitude, in 
case they should be disposed to be unruly, with a display of force 
which could not be resisted without desperation. It may sound 
ridiculous in our ears, considering the fallen state of this ancient 
civic corps, that its officer should have felt punctiliously jealous of 
its honour. Yet so it was. Captain Porteous resented, as an in- 
dignity, the introducing the Welsh Fusileers within the city, and 
drawing them up in the street where no drums but his own were 
allowed to be sounded, without the special command or permission 
of the magistrates. As he could not show his ill-humour to his 
patrons the magistrates, it increased his indignation and his desire 
to be revenged on the unfortunate criminal Wilson, and all who 
favoured him. These internal emotions of jealousy and rage wrought 
a change on the man's mien and bearing, visible to all who saw him 
on the fatal morning when Wilson was appointed to suffer. Por- 
teous's ordinary appearance was rather favourable. He was about 
the middle size, stout, and well made, having a military air, and yet 
rather a gentle and mild countenance. His complexion was brown, 
his face somewhat fretted with the scars of the small-pox, his eyes 
rather languid than keen or fierce. On the present occasion, how- 

c 



3+ THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

ever, it seemed to those who saw him as if he were agitated by- 
some evil demon. His step was irregular, his voice hollow and 
broken, his countenance pale, his eyes staring and wild, his speech 
imperfect and confused, and his whole appearance so disordered, 
that many remarked he seemed to be fey, a Scottish expression, 
meaning the state of those who are driven on to their impending 
fate by the strong impulse of some irresistible necessity. 

One part of his conduct was truly diabolical, if, indeed, it has not 
been exaggerated by the general prejudice entertained against his 
memory. When Wilson, the unhappy criminal, was delivered to 
him by the keeper of the prison, in order that he might be conducted 
to the place of execution, Porteous, not satisfied with the usual pre- 
cautions to prevent escape, ordered him to be manacled. This might 
be justifiable from the character and bodily strength of the male- 
factor, as well as from the apprehensions so generally entertained 
of an expected rescue. But the handcuffs which were produced 
being found too small for the wrists of a man so big-boned as 
Wilson, Porteous proceeded with his own hands, and by great 
exertion of strength, to force them till they clasped together, to the 
exquisite torture of the unhappy criminal. Wilson remonstrated 
against such barbarous usage, declaring that the pain distracted 
his thoughts from the subjects of meditation proper to his unhappy 
condition. 

" It signifies little," replied Captain Porteous ; "your pain will be 
soon at an end." 

" Your cruelty is great," answered the sufferer. " You know not 
how soon you yourself may have occasion to ask the mercy, which 
you are now refusing to a fellow-creature. May God forgive you !" 

These words, long afterwards quoted and remembered, were all 
that passed between Porteous and his prisoner ; but as they took 
air, and became known to the people, they greatly increased the 
popular compassion for Wilson, and excited a proportionate degree 
of indignation against Porteous ; against whom, as strict, and even 
violent in the discharge of his unpopular office, the common people 
had some real and many imaginary causes of complaint. 

When the painful procession was completed, and Wilson, with 
the escort, had arrived at the scaffold in the Grassmarket, there 
appeared no signs of that attempt to rescue him which had occa- 
sioned such precautions. The multitude, in general, looked on 
with deeper interest than at ordinary executions ; and there might 
be seen, on the countenances of many, a stem and indignant expres- 
sion, like that with which the ancient Cameronians might be sup- 
posed to witness the execution of their brethren, who glorified the 
Covenant on the same- occasion, and at the same spot But there ' 
was no attempt at violence. Wilson himself seemed disposed to 
hasten over the space that divided time from eternity. The devo- 
tions proper and usual on such occasions were no sooner finished 
r 4« f submitted to his fate, and the sentence of the law was 
fulfilled. 

He had been suspended on the gibbet so long as to be totally 
depnved of life, when at once, as if occasioned by some newly- 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 35 

received impulse, there arose a tumult among the multitude. Many- 
stones were thrown at Porteous and his guards ; some mischief was 
■done ; and the mob continued to press forward with whoops, shrieks, 
howls, and exclamations. A young fellow, with a sailor's cap slouched 
■over his face, sprung on the scaffold, and cut the rope by which the 
■criminal was suspended. Others approached to cdrry off the body, 
either to secure for it a decent grave, or to try, perhaps, some means 
of resuscitation. Captain Porteous was wrought, by this appearance 
of insurrection against his authority, into a rage so headlong as 
made him forget, that, the sentence having been fully executed, it 
was his duty not to engage in hostilities with the misguided multi- 
tude, but to draw off his men as fast as possible. He sprung from 
the scaffold, snatched a musket from one of his soldiers, commanded 
the party to give fire, and, as several eye-witnesses concurred in 
swearing, set them the example, by discharging his piece, and 
shooting a man dead on the spot. Several soldiers obeyed his 
■command or followed his example ; six or seven persons were slain, 
and a great many were hurt and wounded. 

After this act of violence, the Captain proceeded to withdraw his 
men towards their guard-house in the High Street. The mob 
were not so much intimidated as incensed by what had been done. 
They pursued the soldiers with execrations, accompanied by 
volleys of stones. As they pressed on them, the rearmost soldiers 
turned, and again fired with fatal aim and execution. It is not 
accurately known whether Porteous commanded this second act of 
violence ; but of course the odium of the whole transactions of the 
fatal day attached to him, and to him alone. He arrived at the 
.guard-house, dismissed his soldiers, and went to make his report 
to the magistrates concerning the unfortunate events of the day. 

Apparently by this time Captain Porteous had begun to doubt 
the propriety of his own conduct, and the reception he met with 
from the magistrates was such as to make him still more anxious 
to gloss it over. He denied that he had given orders to fire ; he 
denied he had fired with his own hand ; he even produced the 
fusee which he carried as an officer for examination ; it was 
found still loaded. Of three cartridges which he was seen to put 
in his pouch that morning, two were still there ; a white handker- 
chief was thrust into the muzzle of the piece, and returned unsoiled 
or blackened. To the defence founded on these circumstances it 
was answered, that Porteous had not used his own piece, but had 
been seen to take one from a soldier. Among the many who had 
been killed and wounded by the unhappy fire, there were several 
of better rank ; for even the humanity of such soldiers as fired 
over the heads of the mere rabble around the scaffold, proved in 
some instances fatal to persons who were stationed in windows, or 
observed the melancholy scene from a distance. The voice of 
public indignation was loud and general ; and, ere men's tempers 
had time to cool, the trial of Captain Porteous took place before 
the High Court of Justiciary. After a long and patient hearing, 
the jury had the difficult duty of balancing the positive evidence 
of many persons, and those of respectability, who deposed posi- 



36 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

tively to the prisoner's commanding his soldiers to fire, and himself 
firing his piece, of which some swore that they saw the smoke and 
flash, and beheld a man drop at whom it was pointed, with the 
negative testimony of others, who, though well stationed for seeing 
what had passed, neither' heard Porteous give orders to fire, nor 
saw him fire himself ; but, on the contrary, averred that the first 
shot was fired by a soldier who stood close by him. A great part 
of his defence was also founded on the turbulence of the mob, 
which witnesses, according to their feelings, their predilections, and 
their opportunities of observation, represented differently ; some 
describing as a formidable riot, what others represented as a trifling 
disturbance, such as always used to take place on the like occa- 
sions, when the executioner of the law, and the men commissioned 
to protect him in his task, were generally exposed to some indigni- 
ties. The verdict of the jury sufficiently shows how the evidence 
preponderated in their minds. It declared that John Porteous. 
fired a gun among the people assembled at the execution ; that he 
gave orders to his soldiers to fire, by which many persons were 
killed and wounded ; but, at the same time, that the prisoner and 
his guard had been wounded and beaten, by stones thrown at them 
by the multitude. Upon this verdict, f the Lords of Justiciary 
passed sentence of death against Captain John Porteous, adjudg- 
ing him, in the common form, to be hanged on a gibbet at the 
common place of execution, on Wednesday, 8th September, 1736, 
and all his moveable property to be forfeited to the king's use, 
according to the Scottish law in cases of wilful murder. 



CHAPTER IV. 

" The hour's come, but not the man."* 

Kelfu. 

On the day when the unhappy Porteous was expected to suffer 
the sentence of the law, the place of execution, extensive as it is, 
was crowded almost to suffocation. There was not a window in 
all the lofty tenements around it, or in the steep and crooked street 
called the Bow, by which the fatal procession was to descend from 
the High Street, that was not absolutely filled with spectators. The 
uncommon height and antique appearance of these houses, some 
of which were formerly the property of the Knights Templars, 
and the Knights of St. John, and. still exhibit on their fronts and 
gables the iron cross of these orders, gave additional effect to a 
scene in itself so striking. The area of the Grassmarket re- 
sembled a huge dark lake or sea of human heads, in the centre of 
which arose the fatal tree, tall, black, and ominous, from which 
dangled the deadly halter. Every object takes interest from its 
uses and associations, and the erect beam and empty noose, 
things so simple in themselves, became, on such an occasion, objects 
of terror and of solemn interest. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 37 

Amid so numerous an assembly there was scarcely a word 
spoken, save in whispers. The thirst of vengeance was in some 
degree allayed by its supposed certainty ; and even the populace, 
with deeper feeling than they are wont to entertain, suppressed all 
■clamorous exultation, and prepared to enjoy the scene of retalia- 
tion in triumph, silent and decent, though stern and relentless. It 
seemed as if the depth of their hatred to the unfortunate criminal 
scorned to display itself in anything resembling the more noisy 
current of their ordinary feelings. Had a stranger consulted only 
the evidence of his ears, he might have supposed that so vast a 
multitude were assembled for some purpose which affected them 
with the deepest sorrow, and stilled those noises which, on all ordi- 
nary occasions, arise from such a concourse ; but if he gazed upon 
their faces, he would have been instantly undeceived. The com- 
pressed lip, the bent brow, the stern and flashing eye of almost 
every one on whom he looked, conveyed the expression of men 
come to glut their sight with triumphant revenge. It is probable 
that the appearance of the criminal might have somewhat changed 
the temper of the populace in his favour, and that they might in 
the moment of death have forgiven the man against whom their 
resentment had been so fiercely heated. It had, however, been 
destined, that the mutability of their sentiments was not to be ex- 
posed to this trial. 

The usual hour for producing the criminal had been past for 
many minutes, yet the spectators observed no symptom of his 
appearance. "Would they venture to defraud public justice?" 
was the question which men began anxiously to ask at each other. 
The first answer in every case was bold and positive, — " They dare 
not." But when the point was farther canvassed, other opinions 
were entertained, and various causes of doubt were suggested. 
Porteous had been a favourite officer of the magistracy of the city, 
which, being a numerous and fluctuating body, requires for its sup- 
port a degree of energy in its functionaries, which the individuals 
who compose it cannot at all times alike be supposed to possess 
in their own persons. It was remembered, that in the Information 
for Porteous (the paper, namely, in which his case was stated to 
the Judges of the criminal court,) he had been described by his 
counsel as the person on whom the magistrates chiefly relied in all 
emergencies of uncommon difficulty. It was argued, too, that his 
conduct, on the unhappy occasion of Wilson's execution, was 
capable of being attributed to an imprudent excess of zeal in the 
execution of his duty, a motive for which those under whose autho- 
rity he acted might be supposed to have great sympathy. And as 
these considerations might move the magistrates to make a favour- 
able representation of Porteous's case, there were not wanting 
others in the higher departments of government, which would make 
such suggestions favourably listened to. 

The mob of Edinburgh, when thoroughly excited, had been at 
all times one of the fiercest which could be found in Europe ; and 
of late years they had risen repeatedly against the government, 
and sometimes not without temporary success. They were con- 



38 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

scious, therefore, that they were no favourites with the rulers of 
the period, and that, if Captain Porteous's violence was not alto- 
gether regarded as good service, it might certainly be thought, that 
to visit it with a capital .punishment would rendei, it both delicate 
and dangerous for future officers, in the same circumstances, to act 
with effect in repressing tumults. There is also a natural feeling, 
on the part of all members of government, for the general main- 
tenance of authority ; and it seemed not unlikely, that what to the 
relatives of the sufferers appeared a wanton and unprovoked mas- 
sacre, should be otherwise viewed in the cabinet of St. James's. 
It might be there supposed, that, upon the whole matter, Cap- 
tain Porteous was in the exercise of a trust delegated to him by 
the lawful civil authority ; that he had been assaulted by the popu- 
lace, and several of his men hurt ; and that, in finally repelling 
force by force, his conduct could be fairly imputed to no other 
motive than self-defence in the discharge of his duty. 

These- considerations, of themselves very powerful, induced the 
spectators to apprehend the possibility of a reprieve ; and to the 
various causes which might interest the rulers in his favour, the 
lower part of the rabble added one which was peculiarly well 
adapted to their comprehension. It was averred, in order to in- 
crease the odium against Porteous, that while he repressed with 
the utmost severity the slightest excesses of the poor, he not only 
overlooked the licence of the young nobles and gentry, but was 
very willing to lend them the countenance of his official autho- 
rity, in execution of such loose pranks as it was chiefly his duty to 
have restrained. This suspicion, which was perhaps much exagge- 
rated, made a deep impression on the minds of the populace ; and 
when several of the higher rank joined in a petition, recommend- 
ing Porteous to the mercy of the crown, it was generally supposed 
he owed their favour not to any conviction of the hardship of his 
case, but to the fear of losing a convenient accomplice in their 
debaucheries. It is scarcely necessary to say how much this suspi- 
cion augmented the people's detestation of this obnoxious cri- 
minal, as well as their fear of his escaping the sentence pronounced 
against him. 

While these arguments were stated and replied to, and canvassed 
and supported, the hitherto silent expectation of the people became 
changed into that deep and agitating murmur, which is sent forth 
by the ocean before the tempest begins to howl. The crowded 
populace, as if their motions had corresponded with the unsettled 
state of their minds, fluctuated to and fro without any visible cause 
of impulse, like the agitation of the waters, called by sailors the 
ground-swell. The news, which the magistrates had almost hesi- 
tated to communicate to them, were at length announced, and 
spread among the spectators with a rapidity like lightning. A 
reprieve from the Secretary of State's office, under the hand of his 
Grace the Duke of Newcastle, had arrived, intimating the pleasure 
of Queen Caroline, (regent of the kingdom during the absence of 
George II. on the Continent,) that the execution of the sentence of 
death pronounced against John Porteous, late Captain-Lieutenant 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 39 

of the City Guard of Edinburgh, present prisoner in the tolbooth 
of that city, be respited for six weeks from the time appointed for 
his execution. 

The assembled spectators of almost all degrees, whose minds 
had been wound up to the pitch which we have described, uttered 
a groan, or rather a roar of indignation and disappointed revenge, 
similar to that of a tiger from whom his meal has been rent by his 
keeper when he was just about to devour it. This fierce exclama- 
tion seemed to forbode some immediate explosion of popular 
resentment, and, in fact, such had been expected by the magis- 
trates, and the necessary measures had been taken to repress it. 
But the shout was not repeated, nor did any sudden tumult ensue, 
such as it appeared to announce. The populace seemed to be 
ashamed of having expressed their disappointment in a vain 
clamour, and the sound changed, not into the silence which had 
preceded the arrival of these stunning news, but into stifled mutter- 
ings, which each group maintained among themselves, and which 
were blended into one deep and hoarse murmur which floated above 
the assembly. 

Yet still, though all expectation of the execution was over, the 
mob remained assembled, stationary, as it were, through very re- 
sentment, gazing on the preparations for death, which had now 
been made in vain, and stimulating their feelings, by recalling the 
various claims which Wilson might have had on royal mercy, from 
the mistaken motives on which he acted, as well as from the gene- 
rosity he had displayed towards his accomplice. "This man," 
they said, — " the brave, the resolute, the generous, was executed t» 
death without mercy for stealing a purse of gold, which in some 
sense he might consider as a fair reprisal ; while the profligate 
satellite, who took advantage of a trifling tumult, inseparable from 
such occasions, to shed the blood of twenty of his fellow-citizens, 
is deemed a fitting object for the exercise of the royal prerogative 
of mercy. Is this to be borne ? — would our fathers have borne it ? 
Are not we, like them, Scotsmen and burghers of Edinburgh ?" 

The officers of justice began now to remove the scaffold, and 
other preparations which had been made for the execution, in 
hopes, by doing so, to accelerate the dispersion of the multitude. 
The measure had the desired effect ; for no sooner had the fatal 
tree been unfixed from the large stone pedestal or socket in which 
it was secured, and sunk slowly down upon the wain intended to 
remove it to the place where it was usually deposited, than the 
populace; after giving vent to their feelings in a second shout of 
rage and mortification, began slowly to disperse to their usual 
abodes and occupations. 

The windows were in like manner gradually deserted, and groups 
of the more decent class of citizens formed themselves, as if wait- 
ing to return homewards when the streets should be cleared of the 
rabble. Contrary to what is frequently the case, this description 
of persons agreed in general with the sentiments of their inferiors, 
and considered the cause as common to all ranks. Indeed, as we 
have already noticed, it was by no means amongst the lowest class 



4» THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

of the spectators, or those most likely to be engaged in the riot at 
Wilson's execution, that the fatal fire of Porteous's soldiers had 
taken effect. Several persons were killed who were looking out at 
windows at the scene, who could not of course belong to the 
rioters, and were persons of decent rank and condition. The 
burghers, therefore, resenting the loss which had fallen on their 
own body, and proud and tenacious of their rights, as the citizens 
of Edinburgh have at all times been, were greatly exasperated at 
the unexpected respite of Captain Porteous. 

It was noticed at the time, and afterwards more particularly 
remembered, that, while the mob were in the act of dispersing, 
several individuals were seen busily passing from one place and 
one group of people to another, remaining long with none, but 
whispering for a little time with those who appeared to be de- 
claiming most violently against the conduct of government. These 
active agents had the appearance of men from the country, and 
were generally supposed to be old friends and confederates of 
Wilson, whose minds were of course highly excited against Porteous. 
If, however, it was the intention of these men to stir the multi- 
tude to any sudden act of mutiny, it seemed for the time to be 
fruitless. The rabble, as well as the more decent part of the 
assembly, dispersed, and went home peaceably ; and it was only by- 
observing the moody discontent on their brows, or catching the 
tenor of the conversation they held with each other, that a stranger 
could estimate the state of their minds. We will give the reader 
this advantage, by associating ourselves with one of the numerous 
groups who were painfully ascending the steep declivity of the West 
Bow, to return to their dwellings in the Lawnmarket. 

" An unco thing this, Mrs. Howden," said old Peter Plumdamas 
to his neighbour the rouping-wife, or saleswoman, as he offered her 
his arm to assist her in the toilsome ascent, " to see the grit folk at 
Lunnon set their face against law and gospel, and let loose sic a 
reprobate as Porteous upon a peaceable toun ! " 

" And to think o' the weary walk they hae gien us," answered 
Mrs. Howden, with a groan ; " and sic a comfortable window as I 
had gotten, too, just within a penny-stane-cast of the scaffold— I 
could hae heard every word the minister said — and to pay twal- 
pennies for my stand, and a' for naething ! " 

" I am judging," said Mr. Plumdamas, " that this reprieve wadna 
stand- gude in the auld Scots law, when the kingdom was a 
kingdom." 

" I dinna ken muckle about the law," answered Mrs. Howden ; 
" but I ken, when we had a king, and a chancellor, and parliament- 
men o'our ain, we could aye peeble them wi'stanes when they werena 
gude bairns— But naebody's nails can reach the length o' Lunnon." 
" Weary on Lunnon, and a' that e'er cam out o't ! " said Miss 
Gnzcl Damahoy, an ancient seamstress ; " they hae taen awa our 
parliament and they hae oppressed our trade. Our gentles will 
hardly allow that a Scots needle can sew ruffles on a sark or lace 
on an owerlay." 

" Ye may say that, Miss Damahoy, and I ken o' them that hae 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 4 I 

gotten raisins frae Lunnon by forpits at ance,'' responded Plum- 
damas ; " and then sic an host of idle English gaugers and excise- 
men as hae come doun to vex and torment us, that an honest man 
■canna fetch sae muckle as a bit anker o' brandy frae Leith to the 
Lawnmarket, but he's like to be rubbit o' the very gudes he's boucht 
and paid for. — Weel, I winna justify Andrew Wilson for pitting hands 
on what wasna his ; but if he took nae mair than his ain, there's an 
awfu' difference between that and the fact this man stands for." 

" If ye speak aboot the law," said Mrs. Howden, " here comes 
Mr. Saddletree, that can settle it as weel as ony on the bench." 

The party she mentioned, a grave elderly person with a superb 
periwig, dressed in a decent suit of sad-coloured clothes, came up as 
she spoke, and courteously gave his arm to Miss Grizel Damahoy. 

It may be necessary to mention, that Mr. Bartoline Saddletree 
kept an excellent and highly esteemed shop for harness, saddles, 
•&c. &c. at the sign of the Golden Nag, at the head of Bess Wynd. 
His genius, however (as he himself and 'most of his neighbours 
•conceived), lay towards the weightier matters of the law, and he 
failed not to give frequent attendance upon the pleadings and argu- 
ments of the lawyers and judges in the neighbouring square, where, 
to say the truth, he was oftener to be found than would have con- 
sisted with his own emolument ; but that his wife, an active pains- 
taking person, could, in his absence, make an admirable- shift to 
please the customers and scold the journeymen. This good lady 
was in the habit of letting her. husband take his way, and go on 
improving his stock of legal knowledge without interruption ; but, 
as if in requital, she insisted upon having her own will in the 
domestic and commercial departments which he abandoned to her. 
Now, as Bartoline Saddletree had a considerable gift of words, 
which he mistook for eloquence, and conferred more liberally upon 
the society in which he lived than was at all times gracious and 
acceptable, there went forth a saying, with which wags used some- 
times to interrupt his rhetoric, that, as he had a golden nag at his 
■door, so he had a grey mare in his shop. This reproach induced 
. Mr. Saddletree, on all occasions, to assume rather a haughty and 
stately tone towards his good woman, a circumstance by which she 
seemed very little affected, unless he attempted to exercise any real 
authority, when she never failed to fly into open rebellion. But 
such extremes Bartoline seldom provoked ; for, like the gentle 
King Jamie, he was fonder of talking of authority than really exer- 
cising it. This turn of mind was, on the whole, lucky for him ; 
since his substance was increased without any trouble on his part, 
or any interruption of his favourite studies. 

This word in explanation has been thrown in to the reader, while 
Saddletree was laying down, with great precision, the law upon 
Porteous's case, by which he arrived at this conclusion, that, if 
Porteous had fired five minutes sooner, before Wilson was cut 
down, he would have been versans in licitoj engaged, that is, in a 
lawful act, and-only liable to be punished propter excessum, or for 
lack of discretion, which might have mitigated the punishment to 
fiizna ordinaria. 



42 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" Discretion ! " echoed Mrs. Howden, on whom, it may well be 
supposed, the fineness of this distinction was entirely thrown away, 
— "whan had jock Porteous either grace, discretion, or gude 
manners ? — I mind when his father " 

" But, Mrs. Howden," said Saddletree • 

" And I," said Miss Damahoy, " mind when his mother 

" Miss Damahoy," entreated the interrupted orator 

" And I," said Plumdamas, " mind when his wife " 

" Mr. Plumdamas— Mrs. Howden— Miss Damahoy," again im- 
plored the orator, — " mind the distinction, as Counsellor. Crossmy- 
loof says — ' 1/ says he, ' take a distinction.' Now, the body of the 
criminal being cut down, and the execution ended, Porteous was no 
longer official ; the act which he came to protect and guard being 
done and ended, he was no better than cuivis ex populo." 

" Quivis—quivis, Mr. Saddletree, craving your pardon," said 
(with a prolonged emphasis on the first syllable) Mr. Butler, the 
deputy schoolmaster of a parish near Edinburgh, who at that mo- 
ment came up behind them as the false Latin was uttered. 

" What signifies interrupting me, Mr. Butler ? — but I am glad to 
see ye notwithstanding — I speak after Counsellor Crossmyloof, and 
he said cuivis." 

" If Counsellor Crossmyloof used the dative for the nominative, 
I would have crossed his loof with a tight leathern strap, Mr. 
Saddletree ; there is not a boy on the booby form but should have 
been scourged for such a solecisrn in grammar." 

" I speak Latin like a lawyer, Mr. Butler, and not like a school- 
master," retorted Saddletree. 

" Scarce like a schoolboy, I think," rejoined Butler. 

" It matters little," said Bartoline ; " all I mean to say is, that 
Porteous has become liable to the poena extra ordinem, or capital 
punishment ; which is to say, in plain Scotch, the gallows, simply 
because he did not fire when he was in office, but waited till the 
body was cut down, the execution whilk he had in charge to guard 
implemented, and he himself exonered of the public trust imposed 
on him." 

" But, Mr. Saddletree," said Plumdamas, " do ye really think 
John Porteous's case wad hae been better if he had begun firing 
before ony stanes were flung at a' ? " 

"Indeed do I, neighbour Plumdamas," replied Bartoline, confi- 
dently, " he being then in point of trust and in point of power, the 
execution being but inchoat, or, at least, not implemented, or finally 
ended ; but after Wilson was cut down, it was a' ower — he was clean 
exauctorate, and had nae mair ado but to get awa wi' his guard 
up this West Bow as fast as if there had been a caption after 
him — And this is law, for I heard it laid down by Lord Vincovin- 
centem." 

" Vincovincentem?— Is he a lord of state, or a lord of seat?" 
inquired Mrs. Howden.* 

" A lord of seat— a lord of session. — I fash mysell little wi' lords 
o' state ; they vex me wi' a wheen idle questions about their saddles, 
and curpels, and holsters, and horse-furniture, and what they'll tost, 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 43 

and whan they'll be ready — a wlieen galloping geese — my wife may 
serve the like o' them." 

" And so might she, in her day, hae served the best lord in the 
land, for as little as ye think o' her, Mr. Saddletree," said Mrs. 
Howden, somewhat indignant at the contemptuous way in which 
her gossip was mentioned ; " when she and I were twa gilpies, we 
little thought to hae sitten doun wi' the like o' my auld Davie 
Howden, or you either, Mr. Saddletree." 

While Saddletree, who was not bright at a reply, was cudgelling 
his brains for an answer to this home-thrust, Miss Damahoy broker 
in on him. 

" And as for the lords of state," said Miss Damahoy, " ye suld 
mind the riding o' the parliament, Mr. Saddletree, in the gude auld 
time before the Union, — a year's rent o' mony a gude estate gaed 
for horse-graith and harnessing, forby broidered robes and foot' 
mantles, that wad hae stude by their lane wi' gold brocade, and 
that were muckle in my ain line." 

" Ay, and then the lusty. banqueting, with sweetmeats and com' 
fits wet and dry, and dried fruits of divers sorts," said Plumdamas. 
" But Scotland was Scotland in these days." 

" I'll tell ye what it is, neighbours," said Mrs. Howden, " I'll 
ne'er believe Scotland is Scotland ony mair, if our kindly Scots sit 
doun wi' the affront they hae gien us this day. It's not only the' 
blude that is shed, but the blude that might hae been shed, that's 
required at our hands ; there was my daughter's wean, little Eppie 
Daidle — my oe, ye ken, Miss Grizel — had played the truant frae the" 

school, as bairns will do, ye ken, Mr. Butler " 

"And for which," interjected Mr. Butler, " they should be soundly 
scourged by their well-wishers." 

" And had just cruppen to the gallows-foot to see the hanging, as- 
was natural for a wean ; and what for michtna she hae been shot 
as weel as the rest o' them, and where wad we a' hae been then ? I 
wonder how Queen Carline (if her name be Carline) wad hae liked 
to hae had ane 0' her ain bairns in sic a venture ? " 

" Report says," answered Butler, " that such a circumstance would 
not have distressed her majesty beyond endurance." 

"Aweel,"said Mrs. Howden, "the sumo' the matter is, that, were 
I a man, I wad hae amends o' Jock Porteous, be the upshot what 
like o't, if a' the carles and carlines in 'England had sworn to the 
nay-say." 

" I would claw down the tolbooth door wi' my nails," said Miss- 
Grizel, " but I wad be at him." 

" Ye may be very right, ladies," said Butler, "but I would not 
advise you to speak so loud." 

" Speak ! " exclaimed both the ladies together, " there will be 
naething else spoken aboot frae the Weigh-house to the Water-gate,, 
till this is either ended or mended." 

The females now departed to their respective places of abode.- 
Plumdamas joined the other two gentlemen in drinking their 
■meridian, (a bumper-dram of brandy,) as they passed the well- 
known low-browed shop in the Lawnmarket, where they were wont 



44 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

to take that refreshment. Mr. Plumdamas then departed towards 
his shop, and Mr. Butler, who happened to have some particular 
occasion for the rein of an old bridle, (the truants of that busy day 
could have anticipated its application,) walked down the Lawn- 
market with Mr. Saddletree, each talking as he could get a word 
thrust in, the one on the laws of Scotland, the other on those of 
Syntax, and neither listening to a word which his companion 
uttered. 



CHAPTER V. 

Elswhair he colde right weel lay down the law, 
But in his house was meek as is a daw. 

Davie Lindsay. 

•' There has been Jock Driver the carrier here, speering about 
his new graith," said Mrs. Saddletree to her husband, as he crossed 
his threshold, not with the purpose, by any means, of consulting him 
upon his own affairs, but merely to intimate, by a gentle recapitula- 
tion, how much duty she had gone through in his absence. 

"Weel," replied Bartoline, and deigned not a word more. 

" And the Laird of Girdingburst has had his running footman 
here, and ca'd himsell, (he's a civil pleasant young gentleman,) to 
see when the broidered saddle-cloth for his sorrel horse will be 
ready, for he wants it agane the Kelso races." 

"Weel, aweel," replied Bartoline, as laconically as before. 

" And his lordship, the Earl of Blazonbury, Lord Flash and Flame, 
is like to be clean daft, that the harness for the six Flanders mears, 
wi' the crests, coronets, housings, and mountings conform, are no 
sent hame according to promise gien." 

" Weel, weel, weel — weel, weel, gudewife," said Saddletree, " if 
he gangs daft, we'll hae him cognosced — it's a' very weel." 

" It 's weel that ye think sae, Mr. Saddletree," answered his help- 
mate, rather nettled at the indifference with which her report was 
received ; " there's mony ane wad hae thoucht themselves affronted, 
if sae mony customers had ca'd and naebody to answer them but 
-women-folk ; for a' the lads were aff, as soon as your back was 
turned, to see Porteous hanged, that might be counted upon ; and 
sae, you no being at hame " 

" Houts, Mrs. Saddletree,'' said Bartoline, with an air of conse- 
quence, "dinna deave me wi' your nonsense ; I was under the 
necessity of being elsewhere — non omnia — as Mr. Crossmyloof said, 
when he was called by two macers at once, non omnia fiossumus — 
pessimus—possimis — I ken our law-latin offends Mr. Butler's ears, 
'but it means, naebody, an it were the Lord President himsell, can 
do twa turns at ance." 

" Very right, Mr. Saddletree," answered his careful helpmate, with 
a sarcastic smile ; " and nae doubt it's a decent thing to leave your 
wife to look after young gentlemen's saddles and bridles, when ye 
jjang to see a man, that never did ye nae ill, raxing a halter." 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 45 

" Woman," said Saddletree, assuming an elevated tone, to which 
the meridian had somewhat contributed, " desist, — I say forbear, 
from intromitting with affairs thou canst not understand. D'ye 
think I was born to sit here brogging an elshin through bend- 
leather, when sic men as Duncan Forbes, and that other Arniston 
chield there, without muckle greater parts, if the close-head speak 
true, than mysell, maun be presidents and king's advocates, nae 
doubt, and wha but they ? Whereas, were favour equally distribute,. 
as in the days of the wight Wallace " 

" I ken naething we wad hae gotten by the wight Wallace," said 
Mrs. Saddletree, " unless, as I hae heard the auld folk tell, they 
fought in thae days wi' bend-leather guns, and then it's a chance 
but what, if he had bought them, he might have forgot to pay for 
them. And as for the greatness of your parts, Bartley, the folk in 
the close-head maun ken mair about them than I do, if they make 
sic a report of them." 

" I tell ye, woman," said Saddletree in high dudgeon, " that ye 
ken naething about these matters. In Sir William Wallace's days, 
there was nae man pinned down to sic a slavish wark as a saddler's, 
for they got ony leather graith that they had use for ready-made 
out of Holland." 

"Well," said Butler, who was, like many of his profession, some- 
thing of a humorist and dry joker, " if that be the case, Mr. Saddle- 
tree, I think we have changed for the better ; since we make our 
own harness, and only import our lawyers from Holland." 

" It's ower true, Mr. Butler," answered Bartoline, with a sigh ; 
"if I had had the luck — or rather, if my father had had the sense 
to send me to Leyden and Utrecht to learn the Substitutes and 
Pandex " 

"You mean the Institutes — Justinian's Institutes, Mr. Saddle- 
tree ? " said Butler. 

"Institutes and substitutes are synonymous words, Mr. Butler, 
and used indifferently as such in deeds of tailzie, as you may see 
in Balfour's Practiques, or Dallas of St. Martin's Styles. I under- 
stand these things pretty weel, I thank God ; but I own I should 
have studied in Holland." 

" To comfort you, you might not have been farther forward than 

you are now, Mr. Saddletree," replied Mr. Butler; " for our Scottish 

-advocates are an aristocratic race. Their brass is of the right 

Corinthian quality, and Non cuivis contigit adire Corinthum — 

Aha, Mr. Saddletree?" 

" And aha, Mr. Butler," rejoined Bartoline, upon whom, as may 

be well supposed, the jest was lost, and all but the sound of the 

, words, " ye said a gliff syne it was quivis, and now I heard ye say 

cuivis with my ain ears, as plain as ever I heard a word at the 

fore-bar." 

• " Give me your patience, Mr. Saddletree, and I'll explain the 
discrepancy in three words," said Butler, as pedantic in his own 
department, though with infinitely more judgment and learning, as 
Bartoline was in his self-assumed profession of the law. — " Give me 
your patience for a moment — You'll grant that the nominative case 



46 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

is that by which a person or thing is- nominated or designed, and 
which may be called the primary case, all others being formed from 
it by alterations of the termination in the learned languages, and by 
prepositions in our modern Babylonian jargons— You'll grant me 
that, I suppose, Mr. Saddletree ? " 

" I dinna ken whether I will or no— ad avisandum, ye ken— nae- 
body should be in a hurry to make admissions, either in point of 
law, or in point of fact," said Saddletree, looking, or endeavouring 
to look, as if he understood what was said. 

" And the dative case," continued Butler 

" I ken what a tutor dative is," said Saddletree, " readily enough." 
" The dative case," resumed the grammarian, " is that in which 
any thing is given or assigned as properly belonging to a person, or 
thing— You cannot deny that, I am sure." 

" I am sure I '11 no grant it though," said Saddletree. 
" Then what the deevil d'ye take the nominative and the dative 
•cases to be ? " said Butler, hastily, and surprised at once out of his 
decency of expression and accuracy of pronunciation. 

" I '11 tell you that at leisure, Mr. Butler," said Saddletree, with a 
very knowing look ; " I '11 take a day to see and answer every article 
of your condescendence, and then I '11 hold you to confess or deny, 
as accords." 

" Come, come, Mr. Saddletree," said his wife, " we '11 hae nae 
confessions and condescendences here, let them deal in thae sort o' 
wares that are paid for them — they suit the like o' us as ill as a 
demipique saddle would suit a draught ox." 

" Aha ! " said Mr. Butler," Optat ephippia bos fiiger, nothing new 
under the sun — But it was a fair hit of Mrs. Saddletree, however." 
" And it wad far better become ye, Mr. Saddletree," continued 
his helpmate, " since ye say ye hae skeel o' the law, to try if ye can 
do onything for Effie Deans, puir thing, that's lying up in the 
tolbooth yonder, cauld, and hungry, and comfortless — A servant 
lass of ours, Mr. Butler, and as innocent a lass, to my thinking, and 
as usefu' in the shop — When Mr. Saddletree gangs out, — and ye're 
aware he's seldom at hame when there's ony o' the plea-houses 
open, — poor Effie used to help me to tumble the bundles o' barkened 
leather up and doon, and range out the gudes, and suit a' body's 
bumours — And troth she could aye please the customers wi' her 
answers, for she was aye civil, and a bonnier lass wasna in Auld 
Reekie. And when folk were hasty and unreasonable, she could 
serve them better than me, that am no sae young as I hae been, 
Mr. Butler, and a wee bit short in the temper into the bargain. For 
when there's ower mony folks crying on me at anes, and nane but 
ae tongue to answer them, folk maun speak hastily, or they'll ne'er 
,get through their wark — Sae- 1 miss Effie daily." 
" De die in diem" added Saddletree. 

" I think," said Butler, after a good deal of hesitation, " I have 
seen the girl in the shop — a modest-looking, fair-haired girl ? " 

" Ay, ay, that's just puir Effie," said her mistress. " How she was 
abandoned to hersell, or whether she was sackless o' the sinfu' deed, 
God in Heaven knows ; but if she's been guilty, she's been sair 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 47 

tempted, and I wad amaist take my Bible-aith she hasna been her- 
sell at the time." 

Butler had by this time become much agitated ; he fidgeted up 
and down the shop, and showed the greatest agitation that a person 
of such strict decorum could be supposed to give way to. "Was 
not this girl," he said, " the daughter of David Deans, that had the 
parks at St. Leonards taken ? and has she not a sister ? " 

" In troth has she — puir Jeanie Deans, ten years aulder than her- 
sell ; she was here greeting a wee while syne about her tittie. And 
what could I say to her, but that she behoved to come and speak 
to Mr. Saddletree when he was at hame ? It wasnathat I thought 
Mr. Saddletree could do her or ony ither body muckle gude or ill, 
but it wad aye serve to keep the puir thing's heart up for a wee 
•while ; and let sorrow come when sorrow maun." 

" Ye're mistaen though, gudewife," said Saddletree, scornfully, 
■"for I could hae gien her great satisfaction ; I could hae proved to 
her that her sister was indicted upon the statute saxteen hundred 
and ninety, chapter one — For the mair ready prevention of child- 
murder — for concealing her pregnancy, and giving no account, of 
the child which she had borne." 

" I hope," said Butler, — " I trust in a gracious God that she can 
■clear herself." 

" And sae do I, Mr. Butler," replied Mrs. Saddletree. " I am sure 
I wad hae answered for her as my ain dochter; but, wae's my heart, 
I had been tender a' the simmer, and scarce ower the door o' my 
room for twal weeks. And as for Mr. Saddletree, he might be in a 
lying-in hospital, and ne'er find out what the women cam there for. 
Sae I could see little or naething o' her, or I wad hae had the truth 
o' her situation out o' her, I'se warrant ye— But we a' think her 
sister maun be able to speak something to clear her." 

" The haill Parliament House," said Saddletree, "was speaking 
o' naething else, till this job o' Porteous's put it out o' head — It's a 
l>eautiful point of presumptive murder, and there's been nane like 
it in the Justiciar Court since the case of Luckie Smith the howdie, 
that suffered in the year saxteen hundred and seventy-nine." 

"But what's the matter wi' you, Mr. Butler?" said the good 
woman ; " ye are looking as white as a sheet ; will ye tak a dram?" 

" By no means,"'said Butler, compelling himself to speak. " I 
■walked in from Dumfries yesterday, and this is a warm day." 

" Sit doon," said Mrs. Saddletree, laying hands on him kindly, 
" and rest ye — ye'll kill yoursell, man, at that rate. — And are we 
to wish you joy o' getting the scule, Mr. Butler ? " 

" Yes — no — I do not know," answered the young man, vaguely. 
But Mrs. Saddletree kept him to the point, partly out of real 
interest, partly from curiosity. 

" Ye dinna ken whether ye are to get the free scule o' Dumfries 
or no, after hinging on and teaching it a' the simmer ? " 

"No, Mrs. Saddletree — I am not to have it," replied Butler, 
more collectedly. " The Laird of Black-at-the-bane had a natural 
son bred to the kirk, that the presbytery could not be prevailed 
upon to license ; and so " 



48 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" Ay, ye need say nae mair aboot it ; if there was a laird that 
had a puir kinsman, or a bastard that it wad suit, there's eneuch 
said. — Arid ye're e'en come back to Libberton to wait for dead 
men's shoon ?.— and, for as frail as Mr. Whackbairn is, he may live 
as lang as you, that are his'assistant and successor." 

" Very like," replied Butler, with a sigh ; " I do not know if I 
should wish it otherwise." 

'' Nae doot it's a very vexing thing," continued the good lady, 
" to be in that dependent station; and you that hae richt and title 
to sae muckle better, I wonder how ye bear these crosses." 

" Quos diligit castigat? answered Butler ; " even the Pagan 
Seneca could see an advantage in "affliction. The Heathens had 
their philosophy, and the Jews their revelation, Mrs. Saddletree, 
and they endured their distresses in their day. Christians have a 
better dispensation than either — but doubtless " 

He stopped and sighed. 

" I ken what ye mean," said Mrs. Saddletree, looking toward her 
husband ; "there's whiles we lose patience in spite of baith book 
and Bible — But ye are no gaun awa, and looking sae poorly — yell 
stay and take some kale wi' us ? " 

Mr. Saddletree laid aside Balfour's Practiques, (his favourite 
study, and much good may it do him,) to join in his wife's hospit- 
able importunity. But the teacher declined all entreaty, and took 
his leave upon the spot. 

" There's something in a' this," said Mrs. Saddletree, looking 
after him as he walked up the street ; " I wonder what makes Mr. 
Butler sae distressed about Erne's misfortune — there was nae 
acquaintance atween them that ever I saw or heard of ; but they 
were neebours when David Deans was on the Laird o' Dumbie- 
dikes' land. Mr. Butler wad ken her father or some o' her folk. — 
Get up, Mr. Saddletree — ye have set yoursell down on the very 
brecham that wants stitching — and here's little Willie, the prentice. 
— Ye little rin-there-out deil that ye are, what taks you raking 
through the gutters to see folk hangit ? — how wad ye like when it 
comes to be your ain chance, as I winna ensure ye, if ye dinna 
mend your manners ? — And what are ye maundering and greeting 
for, as if a word were breaking your banes ? — Gang in by, and be 
a better bairn another time, and tell Peggy to gie ye a bicker o' 
broth, for ye'll be as gleg as a gled, I'se warrant ye. — It's a father- 
less bairn, Mr. Saddletree, and motherless, whilk in some cases 
may be waur, and ane would tak care o' him if they could — it's a 
Christian duty." 

" Very true, gudewife," said Saddletree, in reply, " we are in loco 
parentis to him during his years of pupillarity, and I hae had 
thoughts of applying to the Court for a commission as factor loco 
tutoris, seeing there is nae tutor nominate, and the tutor-at-law 
declines to act ; but only I fear the expense of the procedure wad 
not be in rem versam, for I am not aware if Willie has ony effects 
whereof to assume the administration." 

He concluded this sentence with a self-important cough, as one 
who has laid down the law in an indisputable manner. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 49 

" Effects ! " said Mrs. Saddletree, " what effects has the puir 
wean ? — he was in rags when his mother died ; and the blue 
polonie that Erne made for him out of an old mantle o' my ain, 
was the first decent dress the bairn ever had on. Poor Effie ! can 
ye tell me now really, wi' a' your law, will her life be in danger, Mr. 
Saddletree, when they arena able to prove that ever there was a 
bairn ava?" 

" Whoy," said Mr. Saddletree, delighted at having for once in his 
life seen his wife's attention arrested by a topic of legal discussion 
— " Whoy, there are two sorts of murdrum or murdragium, or what 
you populariter et vulgariter call murther. I mean there are many 
sorts ; for there's your murthrum per vigilias et insidias, and your 
murthrum under trust." 

" I am sure," replied his moiety, " that murther by trust is the 
way that the gentry murther us merchants, and whiles mak us 
shut the booth up — but that has naething to do wi' Erne's mis- 
fortune." 

" The case of Effie (or Euphemia) Deans," resumed Saddletree, 
" is one of those cases of murder presumptive, that is, a murder of 
the law's inferring or construction, being derived from certain 
indicia, or grounds of suspicion." 

" So that," said the good, woman, " unless poor Effie has com- 
municated her situation, she'll be hanged by the neck, if the bairn 
was still-born, or if it be alive at this moment ? " 

" Assuredly," said Saddletree, " it being a statute made by our 
sovereign Lord and Lady, to prevent the horrid delict of bringing 
forth children in secret — The crime is rather a favourite of the law, 
this species of murther being one of its ain creation." 

" Then, if the law maks murders," said Mrs. Saddletree, " the 
law should be hanged for them ; or if they wad hang a lawyer in- 
stead, the country wad find nae faut." 

A summons to their frugal dinner interrupted the farther pro- 
gress of the conversation, which was otherwise like to take a turn 
much less favourable to the science of jurisprudence and its profes- 
sors, than Mr. Bartoline Saddletree, the fond admirer of both, had 
at its opening anticipated. 



CHAPTER VI. 



But up then raise all Edinburgh, 
They all rose up by thousands three. 

Johnnie Armstrong's Goodnight. 

Butler, on his departure from the sign of the Golden Nag, 
went in quest of a friend of his connected with the law, of whom 
he wished to make particular inquiries concerning the circumstances 
in which the unfortunate young woman mentioned in the last 
chapter was placed, having, as the reader has probably already 
conjectured, reasons much deeper than those dictated by mere 
humanity, for interesting himself in her fate. He found the person 



SO THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

he sought absent from home, and was equally unfortunate in one 
or two other calls which he made upon acquaintances whom he 
hoped to interest in her story. But everybody was, for the mo- 
ment, stark-mad on the subject of Porteous, and engaged busily in 
attacking or defending the measures of government in' reprieving 
him ; and the ardour of dispute had excited such universal thirst, 
that half the young lawyers and writers, together with their very 
clerks, the class whom Butler was looking after, had adjourned the 
debate to some favourite tavern. It was computed by an experi- 
enced arithmetician, that there was as much twopenny ale 
consumed on the discussion as would have floated a first-rate 
man-of-war. 

Butler wandered about until it was dusk, resolving to take that 
opportunity of visiting the unfortunate young woman, when his 
doing so might be least observed ; for he had his own reasons for 
avoiding the remarks of Mrs. Saddletree, whose shop-door opened 
at no great distance from that of the jail, though on the opposite or 
south side of the street, and a little higher up. He passed, there- 
fore, through the narrow and partly-covered passage leading from 
the north-west end of the Parliament Square. 

He stood now before the Gothic entrance of the ancient prison, 
which, as is well known to all men, rears its ancient front in the 
very middle of the High Street, forming, as it were, the termination 
to a huge pile of buildings called the Luckenbooths, which, for 
some inconceivable reason, our ancestors , had jammed into the 
midst of the principal street of the town, leaving for passage a nar- 
row street on the north, and on the south, into which the prison 
opens, a narrow crooked lane, winding betwixt the high and sombre 
walls of the Tolbooth and the adjacent houses on the one side, and 
the buttresses and projections of the old Cathedral upon the other. 
To give some gaiety to this sombre passage, (well known by the 
name of the Krames,) a number of little booths, or shops, after the 
fashion of cobblers' stalls, are plastered, as it were, against the 
Gothic projections and abutments, so that it seemed as if the 
traders had occupied with nests, bearing the same proportion to 
the building, every buttress and coign of vantage, as the marflett 
did in Macbeth's Castle. Of later years these booths have degene- 
rated into mere toy-shops, where the little loiterers chiefly inte- 
rested in such wares are tempted to linger, enchanted by the rich 
display of hobby horses, babies, and Dutch toys, arranged in artful 
and gay confusion ; yet half scared by the cross looks of the 
withered pantaloon, or spectacled old lady, by whom these tempting 
stores are watched and superintended. But, in the times we write 
of, the hosiers, the glovers, the hatters, the mercers, the milliners, 
and all who dealt in the miscellaneous wares now termed haber- 
dasher's goods, were to be found in this narrow alley. 

To return from our digression. Butler found the outer turnkey, 
a tall thin old man, with long silver hair, in the act of locking the 
outward door of the jail. He addressed himself to this person, and 
asked admittance to Effie Deans, confined upon accusation of 
child-murder. The turnkey looked at him earnestly, and, civilly 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 5* 

touching hisTiat out of respect to Butler's black coat and clerical 
appearance, repliedj " It was impossible any one could be admitted 
at present." 

" You shut up earlier than usual, probably on account of Captain 
Porteous's affair," said Butler. 

The turnkey, with the true mystery of a person in office, gave two 
grave nods, and withdrawing from the wards a ponderous key of 
about two feet in length, he proceeded to shut a strong plate of 
steel, which folded down above the keyhole, and was secured by a 
steel spring and catch. Butler stood still instinctively while the 
door was made fast, and then looking at his watch, walked briskly 
up the .street, muttering to himself almost unconsciously — 

Porta adversa, ingens, solidoque adamante columnas ; 
Vis ut nulla virum, non ipsi exscindere ferro 
Ccelicolae valeant — Stat ferrea turris ad auras — &Cj* 

Having wasted half an hour more in a second fruitless attempt 
to find his legal friend and adviser, he thought it time to leave the 
city and return to his place of residence, in a small village about 
two miles and a half to the southward of Edinburgh. The metro- 
polis was at this time surrounded by a high wall, with battlements 
and flanking projections at some intervals, and the access was 
through gates, called in the Scottish language forts, which were 
regularly shut at night. A small fee to the keepers would indeed 
procure egress and ingress at any time, through a wicket left for 
that purpose in the large-gate, but it was of some importance, to a 
man so poor as Butler, to avoid even this slight pecuniary mulct ; 
and fearing the hour of shutting the gates might be near, he made 
for that to which he found himself nearest, although, by doing so, 
he somewhat lengthened his walk homewards. Bristo Port was 
that by which his direct road lay, but the West Port, which leads 
out of the Grassmarket, was the nearest of the city gates to the 
place where he found himself, and to that, therefore, he directed 
his course. He reached the port in ample time to pass the circuit 
of the walls, and enter a suburb called Portsburgh, chiefly inhabited 
by the lower order of citizens and mechanics. Here he was unex- 
pectedly interrupted. 

He had not gone far from the gate before he heard the sound of 
a drum, and, to his great surprise, met a number of persons, suffi- 
cient to occupy the whole front of the street, and form a consider- 
able mass behind, moving with great speed towards the gate he 
had just come from, and having in front of them a drum beating to 
arms. While he considered how he should escape a party, 
assembled, as it might be presumed, for no lawful purpose, they 
came full on him and stopped him. 

" Are you a clergyman?" one questioned him. 

Butler replied that "he was in orders, but was not a placed 
minister." 

"It's Mr. Butler from Libberton," said a voice from behind; 
" he'll discharge the duty as weel as ony man." 

P 2 



52 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" You must turn back with us, sir,' 7 said the first speaker, in a 
tone civil but peremptory. 

" For what purpose, gentlemen ? " said Mr. Butler. " I live at 
some distance from town — the roads are unsafe by night — you will 
do me a serious injury by stopping me." 

" You shall be sent safely home— no man shall touch a hair of 
your head — but you must and shall come along with us." 

" But to what purpose or end, gentlemen ?|" said Butler. " I hope 
you will be so civil as to explain that to me ?" 

" You shall know that in good time. Come along — for come you 
must, by force or fair means ; and I warn you to look neither to 
the right hand nor the left, and to take no notice of any man's face, 
but consider all that is passing before you as a dream." 

" I would it were a dream I could awaken from," said Butler to 
himself; but having no means to oppose the violence with which 
he was threatened, he was compelled to turn round and march in 
front of the rioters, two men partly supporting and partly holding 
him. During this parley the insurgents had made themselves 
masters of the West Port, rushing upon the Waiters, (so the people 
were called who had the charge of the gates,) and possessing them- 
selves of the keys. They bolted and barred the folding doors, and 
commanded the person, whose duty it usually was, to secure the 
wicket, of which they did not understand the fastenings. The man, 
terrified at an incident so totally unexpected, was unable to perform 
his usual office, and gave the matter up after several attempts. The 
rioters, who seemed to have come prepared for every emergency, called 
for torches, by the light of which they nailed up the wicket with long 
nails, which, it seemed probable, they had provided on purpose. 

While this was going on, Butler could not, even if he had been 
willing, avoid making remarks on the individuals who seemed to 
lead this singular mob. The torch-light, while it fell on their forms 
and left him in the shade, gave him an opportunity to do so with- 
out their observing him. Several-of those who seemed most active 
were dressed in sailors' jackets, trowsers, and sea caps ; others in 
large loose-bodied great-coats and slouched hats ; and there were 
several who, judging from their dress, should have been called 
women, whose rough deep voices, uncommon size, and masculine 
deportment and mode of walking, forbade them being so inter- 
preted. They moved as if by some well-concerted plan of arrange- 
ment. They had signals by which they knew, and nick-names by 
which they distinguished each other. Butler remarked, that the 
name of Wildfire was used among them, to which one stout Amazon 
seemed to reply. 

The rioters left a small party to observe the West Port, and di- 
rected the Waiters, as they valued their lives, to remain within their 
lodge, and make no attempt for that night to repossess themselves 
of the gate. They then moved with rapidity along the low street 
called the Cowgate, the mob of the city everywhere rising at the 
sound of their drum, and joining them. When the multitude 
arrived at the Cowgate Port, they secured it with as little opposi- 
tion as the former, made it fast, and left a small party to observe it. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. S3 

It was afterwards remarked, as a striking instance of prudence and 
precaution, singularly combined with audacity, that the parties left 
to guard those gates did not remain stationary on their posts, but 
flitted to and fro, keeping so near the gates as to see that no efforts 
were made to open them, yet not remaining so long as to have 
their persons closely observed. The mob, at first only about one 
hundred strong, now amounted to thousands, and were increasing 
every moment. They divided themselves so as to ascend with 
more speed the various narrow lanes which lead up from the Cowgate 
to the High Street ; and still beating to arms as they went, and 
calling on all true Scotsmen to join them, they now filled the prin- 
cipal street of the city. 

The Netherbow Port might be called the Temple-bar of Edin- 
burgh, as, intersecting the High Street at its termination, it divided 
Edinburgh, properly so called, from the suburb named the Canon- 
gate, as Temple-bar separates London from Westminster. It was 
of the utmost importance to the rioters to possess themselves of 
this pass, because there was quartered in the Canongate at that 
time a regiment of infantry, commanded by Colonel Moyle, which 
might have occupied the city by advancing through this gate, and 
would possess the power of totally defeating their purpose. The 
leaders therefore hastened to the Netherbow Port, which they 
secured in the same manner, and with as little trouble, as the other 
gates, leaving a party to watch it, strong in proportion to the im- 
portance of the post. 

The next object of these hardy insurgents was at once to dis- 
arm the City Guard, and to procure arms for themselves ; for 
scarce any weapons but staves and bludgeons had been yet seen 
among them. The Guard-house was a long, low, ugly building, 
(removed in 1787,) which to a fanciful imagination might have sug- 
gested the idea of a long black snail crawling up the middle of the 
High Street, and deforming its beautiful esplanade. This formid- 
able insurrection had been so unexpected, that there were no more 
than the ordinary sergeant's guard of the city-corps upon duty ; 
even these were without any supply of powder and ball ; and sen- 
, sible enough what had raised the storm, and which way it was 
rolling, could hardly be supposed very desirous to expose them- 
selves by a valiant defence to the animosity of, so numerous and 
desperate a mob, to whom they were on the present occasion much 
more than usually obnoxious. 

There was a sentinel upon guard, who (that one town-guard sol- 
dier might do his duty on that eventful evening) presented his 
piece, and desired the foremost of the rioters to stand off. The 
young amazon, whom Butler had observed particularly active, 
sprung upon the soldier, seized his musket, and after a struggle 
succeeded in wrenching it from him, and throwing him down on 
the causeway. One or two soldiers, who endeavoured to turn out 
to the support of their sentinel, were in the same manner seized 
and disarmed, and the mob without difficulty possessed themselves 
of the Guard-house, disarming and turning out of doors the rest of 
the men on duty. It was remarked, that, notwithstanding the city 



,54 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

soldiers had been the instrument of the slaughter which this riot 
was designed to revenge, no ill-usage or even insult was offered to 
them. It seemed as if the vengeance of the people disdained to 
stoop at any head meaner than that which they considered as the 
source and origin of their injuries. 

On possessing themselves of the guard, the first act of the mul- 
titude was to destroy the drums, by which they supposed an alarm 
might be conveyed to the garrison in the castle ; for the same 
reason they now silenced their own, which was beaten by a young 
fellow, son to the drummer of Portsburgh, whom they had forced 
upon that service. Their next business was to distribute among 
the boldest of the rioters the guns, bayonets, partisans, halberds, 
and battle or Lochaber axes. Until this period the principal rioters 
had preserved silence on the ultimate object of their rising, as 
being that which all knew, but none expressed. Now, however, 
having accomplished all the preliminary parts of their design, they 
raised a tremendous shout of " Porteous ! Porteous ! To the Tol- 
booth ! To the Tolbooth ! " 

They proceeded with the same prudence when the object seemed 
to be nearly in their grasp, as they had done hitherto when success 
was more dubious. A strong party of the rioters, drawn up in 
front of the Luckenbooths, and facing down the street, prevented 
all access from the eastward, and the west end of the defile formed 
by the Luckenbooths was secured in the same manner ; so that the 
Tolbooth was completely surrounded, and those who undertook 
the task of breaking it open effectually secured against the risk of 
interruption. 

The magistrates, in the meanwhile, had taken the alarm, and 
assembled in a tavern, with the purpose of raising some strength 
to subdue the rioters. The deacons, or presidents of the trades, 
were applied to, but declared there was little chance of their autho- 
rity being respected by the craftsmen, where it was the object to 
save a man so obnoxious. Mr. Lindsay, member of parliament for 
the city, volunteered the perilous task of carrying a verbal message 
from the Lord Provost to Colonel Moyle, the commander of the 
regiment lying in the Canongate, requesting him to force the 
Netherbow Port, and enter the city to put down the tumult. But 
Mr. Lindsay declined to charge himself with any written order, 
which, if found on his person by an enraged mob, might have cost 
him his life ; and the issue of the application was, that Colonel 
Moyle, having no written requisition from the civil authorities, and 
having the fate of Porteous before his eyes as an example of the 
severe construction put by a jury on the proceedings of military 
men acting on their own responsibility, declined to encounter the 
risk to which the Provost's verbal communication invited him. 

More than one messenger was despatched by different ways to 
the Castle, to require the commanding officer to march down his 
troops, to fire a few cannon-shot, or even to throw a shell among 
the mob, for the purpose of clearing the streets. But so strict and 
watchful were the various patrols whom the rioters had established 
in different parts of the street, that none of the emissaries of the 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. SS 

magistrates could reach the gate of the Castle. They were, how- 
ever, turned back without either injury or insult, and with nothing 
more of menace than was necessary to deter them from again at- 
tempting to accomplish their errand. 

The same vigilance was used to prevent everybody of the higher, 
and those which, in this case, might be deemed the more suspicious 
orders of society, from appearing in the street, and observing the 
movements, or distinguishing the persons, of the rioters. Every 
person in the garb of a gentleman was stopped by small parties of 
two or three of the mob, who partly exhorted, partly required of 
them, that they should return to the place from whence they came. 
Many a quadrille party was spoilt that memorable evening ; for the 
sedan chairs of ladies, even of the highest rank, were interrupted 
in their passage from one point to another, in despite of the laced 
footmen and blazing flambeaux. This was uniformly done with a 
deference and attention to the feelings of the terrified females, 
which could hardly have been expected from the videttes of a mob 
so desperate. Those who stopped the chair usually made the ex- 
cuse, that there was much disturbance on the streets, and that it 
was absolutely necessary for the lady's safety that the chair should 
turn back. They offered themselves to escort the vehicles which 
they had thus interrupted in their progress, from the apprehension, 
probably, that some of those who had casually united themselves 
to the riot might disgrace their systematic and determined plan of 
vengeance, by those acts of general insult and licence which are 
common on similar occasions. 

Persons are yet living who remember to have heard from the 
mouths of ladies thus interrupted on their journey in the manner 
we have described, that they were escorted to their lodgings by the 
young men who stopped them, and even handed out of their chairs, 
with a polite attention far beyond what was consistent with their 
dress, which was apparently that of journeymen mechanics.* It 
seemed as if the conspirators, like those who assassinated Cardinal 
Beatoun in former days, had entertained the opinion, that the work 
about which they went was a judgment of Heaven, which, though 
unsanctioned by the usual authorities, ought to be proceeded in 
with order and gravity. 

While their outposts continued thus vigilant, and suffered them- 
selves neither from fear nor curiosity to neglect that part of the 
duty assigned to them, and while the main guards to the east and 
west secured them against interruption, a select body of the rioters 
thundered at the door of the jail, and demanded instant admission. 
No one answered, for the outer keeper had prudently made his 
escape with the keys at the commencement of the riot, and was 
nowhere to be found. The door was instantly assailed with sledge- 
hammers, iron-crows, and the coulters of ploughs, ready provided 
for the purpose, with which they prized, heaved, and battered for 
some time with little effect ; for the door, besides being' of double 
oak planks, clenched, both endlong and athwart, with broad-, 
headed nails, was so hung and secured as to yield to no means of 
forcing, without the expenditure of much time. The rioters, how- 



56 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

ever, appeared determined to gain admittance. Gang after gang 
relieved each other at the exercise, for, of course, only a few could 
work at once; but gang after gang retired, exhausted with their 
violent exertions, without making much progress in forcing the 
prison-door. Butler had been led up near to this the principal 
scene of action ; so near, indeed, that he was almost deafened by 
.the unceasing clang of the heavy fore-hammers against the iron- 
bound portal of the prison. He began to entertain hopes, as the 
task seemed protracted, that the populace might give it over in 
despair, or that some rescue might arrive to disperse them. There 
was a moment at which the latter seemed probable. 

The magistrates, having assembled their officers, and some of the 
citizens who were willing to hazard themselves for the public tran- 
quillity, now sallied forth from the tavern where they held their 
sitting, and approached the point of danger. Their officers went 
before them with links and torches, with a herald to read the riot 
act, if necessary. They easily drove before them the outposts and 
videttes of the rioters ; ' but when they approached the line of guard 
which the mob, or rather, we should say, the conspirators, had 
drawn across the street in the front of the Luckenbooths, they were 
received with an unintermitted volley of stones, and, on theirnearer 
approach, the pikes, bayonets, and Lochaber-axes, of which the 
populace had possessed themselves, were presented against them. 
One of their ordinary officers, a strong resolute fellow, went for- 
ward, seized a rioter, and took from him a musket ; but, being un- 
supported, he was instantly thrown on his back in the street, and 
disarmed in his turn. The officer was too happy to be permitted 
to rise and run away without receiving any further injury ; which 
afforded another remarkable instance of the mode in which these 
men had united a sort of moderation towards all others, with the 
most inflexible inveteracy against the object of their resentment. 
The magistrates, after vain attempts to make themselves heard and 
obeyed, possessing no means of enforcing their authority, were 
constrained to abandon the field to the rioters, and retreat in all 
speed from the showers of missiles that whistled around their ears. 

The passive resistance of the Tolbooth-gate promised to do more 
to baffle the purpose of the mob than the active interference of the 
magistrates. The heavy sledge-hammers continued to din against 
it without intermission, and with a noise which echoed from the 
lofty buildings around the spot, seemed enough to have alarmed the 
garrison in the Castle. It was circulated among the rioters, that 
the troops would march down to disperse them, unless they could 
execute their purpose without loss of time ; or that even without 
quitting the fortress, the garrison might obtain the same end by 
throwing a bomb or two upon the street. 

Urged by such motives for apprehension, they eagerly relieved 
each other at the labour of assailing the Tolbooth door : yet such 
was its strength, that it still defied their efforts. At length, a voice 
was heard to pronounce the words, " Try it with fire." The rioters, 
with an unanimous shout, called for combustibles, and as all their 
wishes seemed to be instantly supplied, they were soon in posses- 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 57 

sion of two or three empty tar-barrels. A huge red glaring bonfire 
speedily arose close to the door of the prison, sending up a tall 
column of smoke and flame against its antique turrets and strongly- 
grated windows, and illuminating the ferocious and wild gestures 
of the rioters who surrounded the place, as well as the pale and 
anxious groups of those, who, from windows in the vicinage, watched 
the progress of this alarming scene. The mob fed the fire with 
whatever they could find fit for the purpose. The flames roared 
and crackled among the heaps of nourishment piled on the fire, 
and a terrible shout soon announced that the door had kindled, and 
was in the act of being destroyed. The fire was suffered to decay, 
but, long ere it was quite extinguished, the most forward of the 
rioters rushed, in their impatience, one after another, over its yet 
smouldering remains. Thick showers of sparkles rose high in the 
air, as man after man bounded over the glowing embers, and dis- 
turbed them in their passage. It was now obvious to Butler, and 
all others who were present, that the rioters would be instantly in 
possession of their victim, and have it in their power to work their 
pleasure upon him whatever that might be.* 



CHAPTER VII. 



The evil you teach us, we will execute ; and it shall go hard, but 
we will better the instruction. 

Merchant of Venice. 

The unhappy object of this remarkable disturbance had been 
that day delivered from the apprehension of a public execu- 
tion, and his joy was the greater, as he had some reason to question 
whether government would have run the risk of unpopularity by in- 
terfering in his favour, after he had been legally convicted by the 
verdict of a jury, of a crime so very obnoxious. Relieved from this 
doubtful state of mind, his heart was merry within him, and he 
thought, in the emphatic words of Scripture on a similar occasion, 
that surely the bitterness of death was past. Some of his friends, 
however, who had watched the manner and behaviour of the crowd 
when they were made acquainted with the reprieve, were of a diffe- 
rent opinion. They augured, from the unusual sternness and silence 
with which they bore their disappointment, that the populace nou- 
rished some scheme of sudden and desperate vengeance ; and they 
advised Porteous to lose no time in petitioning the proper authori- 
ties, that he might be conveyed to the Castle under a sufficient 
guard, to remain there in security until his ultimate fate should be 
determined. Habituated, however, by his office, to overawe the 
rabble of the city, Porteous could not suspect them of an attempt 
so audacious as to storm a strong and defensible prison ; and, de- 
spising the advice by which he might have been saved, he spent the 
afternoon of the eventful day in giving an entertainment to some 
friends who visited him in jail, several of whom, by the indulgence 
of the Captain of the Tolboofh, with whom he had an old intimacy, 



58 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

arising from their official connection, were evenpermitted to remain 
to supper with him, though contrary to the rules of the jail. 

It was, therefore, in the hour of unalloyed mirth, when this unfor- 
tunate wretch was " full of bread," hot with wine, and high in mis- 
timed and ill-grounded confidence, and, alas ! with all his sins full 
blown, when the first distant shouts of the rioters mingled with the 
song of merriment and intemperance. The hurried call of the 
jailor to the guests, requiring them instantly to depart, and his yet 
more hasty intimation that a dreadful and determined mob had 
possessed themselves of the city gates and guard-house, were the 
first explanation of these fearful clamours. 

Porteous might, however, have eluded the fury from which the 
force of authority could not protect him, had he thought of slipping 
on some disguise, and leaving the prison along with his guests. It 
is probable that the jailor might have connived at his escape, or 
even that, in the hurry of this alarming contingency, he might not 
have observed it. But Porteous and his friends alike wanted pre- 
sence of mind to suggest or execute such a plan of escape. The 
latter hastily fled from a place where their own safety seemed com- 
promised, and the former, in a state resembling stupefaction, awaited 
in his apartment the termination of the enterprise of the rioters. 
The cessation of the clang of the instruments with which they had 
at first attempted to force the door, gave him momentary relief. 
The flattering hopes, that the military had marched into the city, 
either from the Castle or from the suburbs, and that the rioters 
were intimidated and dispersing, were soon destroyed by the broad 
and glaring light of the flames, which, illuminating through the 
grated window every corner of his apartment, plainly showed that 
the mob, determined on their fatal purpose, had adopted a means 
of forcing entrance equally desperate and certain. 

The sudden glare of light suggested to the stupified and asto- 
nished object of popular hatred the possibility of concealment or 
escape. To rush to the chimney, to ascend it at the risk of suffo- 
cation, were the only means which seemed to have occurred to him; 
but his progress was speedily stopped by one of those iron gratings, 
which are, for the sake of security, usually placed across the vents 
of buildings designed for imprisonment. The bars, however, 
which impeded his farther progress, served to support him in the 
situation which he had gained, and he seized them with the tena- 
cious grasp of one who esteemed himself clinging to his last hope 
of existence. The lurid light, which had filled the apartment, low- 
ered and died away ; the sound of shouts was heard within the 
walls, and on the narrow and winding stair, which, cased, within 
one of the turrets, gave access to the upper apartments of the pri- 
son. The huzza of the rioters was answered by a shout wild and 
desperate as their own, the cry, namely, of the imprisoned felons, 
who, expecting to be liberated in the general confusion, welcomed 
the mob as their deliverers. By some of these the apartment of 
Porteous was pointed out to his enemies. The obstacle of the lock 
and bolts was soon overcome, and from his hiding-place the unfor- 
tunate man heard his enemies search every corner of the apart- 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 59 

ment, with oaths and maledictions, which would but shock the 
reader if we recorded them, but which served to prove, could it 
have admitted of doubt, the settled purpose of soul with which they 
sought his destruction. 

A place of concealment so obvious to suspicion and scrutiny as 
that which Porteous had chosen, could not long screen him from 
detection. He was dragged from his lurking-place, with a vio- 
lence which seemed to argue an intention to put him to death 
on the spot. More than one weapon was directed towards 
him, when one of the rioters, the same whose female disguise had 
been particularly noticed by Butler, interfered in an authoritative 
tone. " Are ye mad ? " he said, " or would ye execute an act of jus- 
tice as if it were a crime and a cruelty? This sacrifice will lose 
half its savour if we do not offer it at the very horns of the altar. 
We will have him die where a murderer should die, on the com- 
mon gibbet — We will have him die where he spilled the blood of so 
many innocents ! " 

A loud shout of applause followed the proposal, and the cry, " To 
the gallows with the murderer ! — To the Grassmarket with him ! " 
echoed on all hands. 

" Let no man hurt him," continued the speaker ; "let him make 
his peace with God, if he can ; we will not kill both his soul and 
body." > 

" What time did he give better folk for preparing their account ?" 
answered several voices. " Let us mete to him with the same mea- 1 
sure he measured to them." 

But the opinion of the spokesman better suited the temper of. 
those he addressed, a temper rather stubborn than impetuous, 
sedate though ferocious, and desirous of colouring their cruel and 
revengeful action with a show of justice and moderation. 

For an instant this man quitted the prisoner, whom he consigned 
to a selected guard, with instructions to permit him to give his 
money and property to whomsoever he pleased. A person confined 
in the jail for debt received this .last deposit from the trembling 
hand of the victim, who was at the same time permitted to make 
some other brief arrangements to meet his approaching fate. The 
felons, and all others who wished to leave the jail, were now at full 
liberty to do so ; not that their liberation made any part of the 
settled purpose of the rioters, but it followed as almost a necessary 
consequence of forcing the jail doors. With wild cries of jubilee 
they joined the mob, or disappeared among the narrow lanes to 
seek out the hidden receptacles of vice and infamy, where they 
were accustomed to lurk and conceal themselves from justice. 

Two persons, a man about fifty years* old, and a girl about 
eighteen, were all who continued within the fatal walls, excepting 
two or three debtors, who probably saw no advantage in attempting 
their escape. The persons we have mentioned remained in the 
strong-room of the prison, now deserted by all others. One of 
their late companions in misfortune called out to the man to make 
his escape, in the tone of an acquaintance, " Rin for it, Ratcliffe — 
the road's clear." 



60 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" It may be sae, Willie," answered Ratcliffe, composedly, "but I 
have taen a fancy to leave aff trade, and set up for an honest 
man." 

" Stay there, and be hanged, then, for a donnard auld deevil ! " 
said the other, and ran down the prison-stair. 

The person in female attire whom we have distinguished as one 
of the most active rioters, was about the same time at the ear of the 
young woman. " Flee, Effie, flee ! " was all he had time to whisper. 
She turned towards him an eye of mingled fear, affection, and up- 
braiding, all contending with a sort of stupified surprise. He again 
repeated, " Flee, Effie, flee, for the sake of all that's good and dear 
to you ! " Again she gazed on him, but was unable to answer. A 
loud noise was now heard, and the name of Madge Wildfire was 
repeatedly called from the bottom of the staircase. 

" I am coming,— I am coming," said the person who answered 
to that appellative ; and then reiterating hastily, " For God's sake 
— for your own sake— for my sake, flee, or they'll take your life ! " 
he left the strong-room. 

The girl gazed after him for a moment, and then, faintly mutter- 
ing, " Better tyne life, since tint is gude fame," she sunk her head 
upon her hand, and remained, seemingly, unconscious as a statue, 
of the noise and tumult which passed around her. 

That tumult was now transferred from the inside to the outside 
of the Tolbooth. The mob had brought their destined victim forth, 
and were about to conduct him to the common place of execution, 
which they had fixed as the scene of his death. The leader, whom 
they distinguished by the name of Madge Wildfire, had been sum- 
moned to assist at the procession by the impatient shouts of his 
confederates. 

" I will ensure you five hundred pounds," said the unhappy man, 
grasping Wildfire's hand, — " five hundred pounds for to save my 
life.". 

The other answered in the same under-tone, and returning his 
grasp with one equally convulsive, " Five hundred-weight of coined 
gold should not save you. — Remember Wilson ! " . 

A deep pause of a minute ensued, when Wildfire added, in a 
more composed tone, " Make your peace with Heaven. — Where is 
the clergyman ? " 

Butler, who, in great terror and anxiety, had been detained with- 
in a few yards of the Tolbooth door, to wait the event of the search 
after Porteous, was now brought forward, and commanded to walk 
by the prisoner's side, and to prepare him for immediate death. 
His answer was a supplication that the rioters would consider what 
they did. " You are neither judges nor jury," said he. " You can- 
not have, by the laws of God or man, power to take away the life 
of a human creature, however deserving he may be of death. If it 
is murder even in a lawful magistrate to execute an offender other- 
wise than in the place, time, and manner which the judges' sentence 
prescribes, what must it be in you, who have no warrant for inter- 
ference but your own wills ? In the name of Him who is all mercy, 
show mercy to this unhappy man, and do not dip your hands in his 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 6l 

blood, nor rush into the very crime which you are desirous of 



avenging 



i" 



" Cut your sermon short — you are not in your pulpit," answered 
one of the rioters. 

" If we hear more of your clavers," said another, " we are like to 
hang you up beside him." 

" Peace — hush ! " said Wildfire. " Do the good man no harm — 
he discharges his conscience, and I like him the better." 

He then addressed Butler. " Now, sir, we have patiently heard 
you, and we just wish you to understand, in the way of answer, that 
you may as well argue to the ashler-work and iron stanchels of the 
Tolbooth, as think to change our purpose — Blood must have blood. 
We have sworn to each other by the deepest oaths ever were 
pledged, that Porteous shall die the death he deserves so richly ; 
therefore, speak no more to us, but prepare him for death as well as 
the briefness of his change will permit." 

They had suffered the unfortunate Porteous to put on his night- 
gown and slippers, as he had thrown off his coat and shoes, in order 
to facilitate his attempted escape up the chimney. In this garb he 
was now mounted on the hands of two of the rioters, clasped to- 
gether, so as to form what is called in Scotland, " The -King's 
Cushion." Butler was placed close to his side, and repeatedly 
urged to perform a duty always the most painful which can be im- 
posed on a clergyman deserving of the name, and now rendered 
more so by the peculiar and horrid circumstances of the criminal's 
case. Porteous at first uttered some supplications for mercy, but 
when he found that there was no chance that these would be at- 
tended to, his military education, and the natural stubbornness of 
his disposition, combined to support his spirits. 

"Are you prepared for this dreadful end?" said Butler, in a 
faltering voice. " O turn to Him, in whose eyes time and space 
have no existence, and to whom a few minutes are as a lifetime, and 
a lifetime as a minute." 

" I believe I know what you would say," answered Porteous 
sullenly. " I was bred a soldier ; if they will murder me without 
time, let my sins as well as my blood lie at their door." 

" Who was it," said the stern voice of Wildfire, " that said to 
Wilson at this very spot, when he could not pray, owing to the 
galling agony of his fetters, that his pains would soon be over ? — I 
say to you to take your own tale home ; and if you cannot profit by 
the good man's lessons, blame not them that are still more merciful 
to you than you were to others." 

The procession now moved forward with a slow and determined 
pace. It was enlightened by many blazing links and torches ; for 
the actors of this work were so far from affecting any secrecy on the 
occasion, that they seemed even to court observation. Their prin- 
cipal leaders kept close to the person of the prisoner, whose pallid 
yet stubborn features were seen distinctly by the torch-light, as his 
person was raised considerably above the concourse which thronged 
around him. Those who bore swords, muskets, and battle-axes, 
marched on each side, as if forming a regular guard to the pro- 



62 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

cession. The windows, as they went along, were filled with the 
inhabitants, whose slumbers had been broken by this unusual dis- 
turbance. Some of the spectators muttered accents of encourage- 
ment; but in general they were so much appalled by a sight so 
strange and audacious, that they looked on with a sort of stupified 
astonishment. No one offered, by act or word, the slightest inter- 
ruption. 

The rioters, on their part, continued to act with the same air of 
deliberate confidence and security which had marked all their pro- 
ceedings. When the object of their resentment dropped one of his 
slippers, they stopped, sought for it, and replaced it upon his foot 
with great deliberation* As- they descended the Bow towards the 
fatal spot where they designed to complete their purpose, it was 
suggested that there should be a rope kept in readiness. For this 
purpose the booth of a man who dealt in cordage was forced open, 
a coil of rope fit for their purpose was selected to serve as a halter, 
and the dealer next morning found that a guinea had been left on 
his counter in exchange ; so anxious were the perpetrators of this 
daring action to show that they meditated not the slightest wrong 
or infraction of law, excepting so far as Porteous was himself 
concerned. 

Leading, or carrying along with them, in this determined and 
regular manner, the object of their vengeance, they at length reached 
the place of common execution, the scene of his crime, and destined 
spot of his sufferings. Several of the rioters (if they should not 
rather be described as conspirators) endeavoured to remove the 
stone which filled up the socket in which the end of the fatal tree 
was sunk when it was erected for its fatal purpose ; others sought 
for the means of constructing a temporary gibbet, the place in which 
the gallows itself was-deposited being reported too secure to be 
forced, without much lpss of time. Butler endeavoured to avail 
himself of the delay afforded by these circumstances, to turn the 
people from their desperate design. " For God's sake," he ex- 
claimed, " remember it is the image of your Creator which you are 
about to deface in the person of this unfortunate man ! Wretched 
as he is, and wicked as he may be, he has a share in every promise 
of Scripture, and you cannot destroy him in impenitence without 
blotting his name from the Book of Life — Do not destroy soul and 
body ; give time for preparation." 

'■ What time had they," returned a stern voice, " whom he mur- 
dered on this very spot ? — The laws both of God and man call for 
his death." 

"But what, my friends," insisted Butler, with a generous dis- 
regard to his own safety— " what hath constituted you his 
judges ? " 

" We are not his judges," replied the same person ; " he has been ' 
already judged and condemned by lawful authority. We are those 
whom Heaven and our righteous anger, have stirred up to execute 
judgment, when a corrupt government would have protected a 
murderer." 

" I am none," said the unfortunate Porteous ; " that which you 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 63 

charge upon me fell out in self-defence, in the lawful exercise of my 
duty." 

" Away with him — away with him ! " was the general cry. " Why 
do you trifle away time in making a gallows ? — that dyester's pole 
is good enough for the homicide." 

The unhappy man was forced to his fate with remorseless rapidity. 
Butler, separated from him by the press, escaped the last horrors 
of his struggles. Unnoticed by those who had hitherto detained 
him as a prisoner, he fled from the fatal spot, without much caring 
in what direction his course lay. A loud shout proclaimed the stern 
delight with which the agents of this deed regarded its completion. 
Butler, then, at the opening into the low street called the Cowgate, 
cast back a terrified glance, and, by the red and dusky light of the 
torches, he could discern a figure wavering and struggling as it hung 
suspended above the heads of the multitude, and could even observe 
men striking at it with their Lochaber-axes and partizans. The 
sight was of a nature to double his horror, and to add wings to his 
flight. 

The street down which the fugitive ran, opens to one of the 
eastern ports or gates of the city. Butler did not stop till he reached 
it, but found it still shut. He waited nearly an hour, walking up and 
down in inexpressible perturbation of mind. At length he ventured 
to call out, and rouse the attention of the terrified keepers of the 
gate, who now found themselves at liberty to resume their office 
without interruption. Butler requested them to open the gate. They 
hesitated. He told them his name and occupation. 

" He is a preacher," said one ; " I have heard him preach in 
Haddo's-hole." 

" A fine preaching has he been at the night," said another ; " but 
maybe least said is sunest mended." 

Opening then the wicket of the main-gate, the keepers suffered 
Butler to depart, who hastened to carry his horror and fear beyond 
the walls of Edinburgh. His first purpose was, instantly to take 
the road homeward ; but other fears and cares, connected with the 
news he had learned in that remarkable day, induced him to linger 
in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh until daybreak. More than one 
group of persons passed him as he was whileing away the hours of 
darkness that yet remained, whom, from the stifled tones of their 
discourse, the unwonted hour when they travelled, and the hasty 
pace at which they walked, he conjectured to have been engaged in 
the late fatal transaction. 

Certain it was, that the sudden and total dispersion of the rioters, 
when their vindictive purpose was accomplished, seemed not the 
least remarkable feature of this singular affair. In general, what- 
ever may be the impelling motive by which a mob is at first raised, 
the attainment of their object has usually been only found to lead the 
way to farther excesses. But not so in the present case. They seemed 
completely satiated with the vengeance they "had prosecuted with 
such stanch and sagacious activity. When they were fully satisfied 
that life had abandoned their victim, they dispersed in every direc- 
tion, throwing down the weapons which they had only assumed to 



64 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

enable them to carry through their purpose. At daybreak there 
remained not the least token of the events of the night, excepting 
the corpse of Porteous, which still hung suspended in the place where 
he had suffered, and the arms of various kinds which the rioters had 
taken from the city guard-house, which were found scattered about 
the streets as they had thrown them from their hands, when the 
purpose for which they had seized them was accomplished. 

The ordinary magistrates of the city resumed their power, not 
without trembling at the late experience of the fragility of its tenure. 
To march troops into the city, and commence a severe inquiry into 
the transactions of the preceding night, were the first marks of re- 
turning energy which they displayed. But these events had been 
conducted on so secure and well-calculated a plan of safety and 
secrecy, that there was little or nothing learned to throw light upon 
the authors or principal actors in a scheme so audacious. An ex- 
press was despatched to London with the tidings, where they 
excited great indignation and surprise in the council of regency, 
and particularly in the bosom of Queen Caroline, who considered 
her own authority as exposed to contempt by the success of this 
singular conspiracy. Nothing was spoke of for some time save the 
measure of vengeance which should be taken, not only on the actors 
of this tragedy, so soon as they should be discovered, but upon the 
magistrates who had suffered it to take place, and upon the city 
which had been the scene where it was exhibited. On this occasion, 
it is still recorded in popular tradition, that her Majesty, in the 
height of her displeasure, told the celebrated John, Duke of Argyle, 
that, sooner than submit to such an insult, she would make Scot- 
land a hunting-field. " In that case, Madam," answered that high- 
spirited nobleman, with a profound bow, " I will take leave of 
your Majesty, and go down to my own country to get my hounfls 
ready." 

The import of the reply had more than met the ear ; and as 
most of the Scottish nobility and gentry seemed actuated by the 
same national spirit, the royal displeasure was necessarily checked 
in mid-volley, and milder courses were recommended and adopted, 
to some of which we may hereafter have occasion to advert.* 



CHAPTER VIII. 



Arthur's Seat shall be my bed, 
The sheets shall ne'er be press'd by me ; 

St. Anton's well shall be my drink, 

Sin' my true-love's forsaken me. Old Song. 

If I were to choose a spot from which the rising or setting sun 
could be seen to the greatest possible advantage, it would be that 
wild path winding around the foot of the high belt of semicircular 
rocks, called Salisbury Crags, and marking the verge of the steep 
descent which slopes down into the glen on the south-eastern side 
of the city of Edinburgh. The prospect, in its general outline, 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 65 

commands a close-built, high-piled city, stretching itself out beneath 
in a form, which, to a romantic imagination, may be supposed to 
represent that of a dragon ; now, a noble arm of the sea, with its 
rocks, isles, distant shores, and boundary of mountains ; and now, 
a fair and fertile champaign country, varied with hill, dale, and 
rock, and skirted by the picturesque ridge of the Pentland 
Mountains. But as the path gently circles around the base of the 
cliffs, the prospect, composed as it is of these enchanting and 
sublime objects, changes at every step, and presents them blended 
with, or divided from, each other, in every possible variety which 
can gratify the eye and the imagination. When a piece of scenery 
so beautiful, yet so varied, — so exciting by its intricacy, and yet so 
sublime, — is lighted up by the tints of morning or of evening, and 
displays all that variety of shadowy depth, exchanged with partial 
brilliancy, which gives character even to the tamest of landscapes, 
the effect approaches near to enchantment. This path used to be 
my favourite evening and morning resort, when engaged with a 
favourite author, or new subject of study. It is, I am informed, 
now become totally impassable ; a circumstance which, if true, 
reflects little credit on the taste of the Good Town or its leaders.* 

It was from this fascinating path — the scene to me of so much 
delicious musing, when life was young and promised to be happy, 
that I have been unable to pass it over without an episodical 
description — it was, I say, from this romantic path that Butler saw 
the morning arise the day after the murder of Porteous. It was 
possible for him with ease to have found a much shorter road to the 
house to which he was directing his course, and, in fact, that which 
he chose was extremely circuitous. But to compose his own 
spirits, as well as to while away the time, until a proper hour for 
visiting the family without surprise or disturbance, he was induced 
to extend his circuit by the foot of the rocks, and to linger upon his 
way until the morning should be considerably advanced. While, 
now standing with his arms across, and waiting the slow progress 
of the sun above the horizon, now sitting upon one of the numerous 
fragments which storms had detached from the rocks above him, 
he is meditating, alternately, upon the horrible catastrophe which 
he had witnessed, and upon the melancholy, and to him most 
interesting, news which he had learned at Saddletree's, we will give 
the reader to understand who Butler was, and how his fate was 
connected with that of Effie Deans, the unfortunate handmaiden 
of the careful Mrs. Saddletree. 

Reuben Butler was of English extraction, though born in Scot- 
land. His grandfather was a trooper in Monk's army, and one of 
the party of dismounted dragoons which formed the forlorn hope at 
the storming of Dundee in 165 1. Stephen Butler (called, from his 
talents in reading and expounding, Scripture Stephen, and Bible 
Butler) was a stanch Independent, and received in its fullest com- 
prehension the promise that the saints should inherit the earth. 
As hard knocks were what had chiefly fallen to his share hitherto 
in the division of this common property, he lost not the opportunity 
which the storm and plunder of a commercial place afforded him, 



66 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

to appropriate as large a share of the better things of this world as 
he could possibly compass. It would seem that he had succeeded 
indifferently well, for his exterior circumstances appeared, in conse- 
quence of this event, to have been much mended. 

The troop to which he belonged was quartered at the village of 
Dalkeith, as forming the body-guard of Monk, who, in the capacity 
of general for the Commonwealth, resided in the neighbouring 
castle. When, on the eve of the Restoration, the general com- 
menced his march from Scotland, a measure pregnant with such 
important consequences, he new-modelled his troops, and more 
especially those immediately about his person, in order that they 
might consist entirely of individuals devoted to himself. On this 
occasion, Scripture Stephen was weighed in the balance, and found 
wanting. It was supposed he felt no call to any expedition which 
might endanger the reign of the military sainthood, and that he did 
not consider himself as free in conscience to join with any party 
which might be likely ultimately to acknowledge the interest of 
Charles Stewart, the son of "the last man," as Charles I. was 
familiarly and irreverently termed by them in their common 
discourse, as well as in their more elaborate predications and 
harangues. As the time did not admit of cashiering such dissi- 
dents, Stephen Butler was only advised in a friendly way to give up 
his horse and accoutrements to one of Middleton's old troopers, 
who possessed an accommodating conscience of a military stamp, , 
and which squared itself chiefly upon those of the Colonel and pay- 
master. As this hint came recommended by a certain sum of 
arrears presently payable, Stephen had carnal wisdom enough to 
embrace the proposal, and with great indifference saw his old corps 
depart for Coldstream, on their route for the south, to establish the 
tottering government of England on a new basis. 

The zone of the ex-trooper, to use Horace's phrase, was weighty 
enough to purchase a cottage and two or three fields (still known 
by the name of Beersheba), within about a Scottish mile of Dal- 
keith ; and there did Stephen establish himself with a youthful 
helpmate, chosen out of the said village, whose disposition to a 
comfortable settlement on this side of the grave reconciled her to 
the gruff manners, serious temper, and weather-beaten features of 
the martial enthusiast. Stephen did not long survive the falling on 
" evil days and evil tongues," of which Milton, in the same pre- 
dicament, so mournfully complains. At his death his consort 
remained an early widow, with a male child of three years old, 
which, in the sobriety wherewith it demeaned itself, in the old- 
fashioned and even grim cast of its features, and in its sententious 
mode of expressing itself, would sufficiently have vindicated the 
honour of the widow of Beersheba, had any one thought proper to 
challenge the babe's descent from Bible Butler. 

Butler's principles had not descended to his family, or extended 
themselves among his neighbours. The air of Scotland was alien 
to the growth of independency, however favourable to fanaticism 
under other colours. But, nevertheless, they were not forgotten ; 
and a certain neighbouring Laird, who piqued himself upon the 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 67 

loyalty of his principles " in the worst of times " (though I never 
heard they exposed him to more peril than that of a broken head, 
or a night's lodging in the main guard, when wine and cavalierism 
predominated in his upper story), had found it a convenient thing 
to rake up all matter of accusation against the deceased Stephen. 
In this enumeration his religious principles made no small figure, 
as, indeed, they must have seemed of the most exaggerated enor- 
mity to one whose own were so small and so faintly traced, as to be 
well-nigh imperceptible. In these circumstances, poor widow 
Butler was supplied with her full proportion of fines for non- 
conformity, and all the other oppressions of the time, until Beer- 
sheba was fairly wrenched out of her hands, and became the 
property of the Laird who had so wantonly, as it had hitherto 
appeared, persecuted this poor forlorn woman. When his purpose 
was fairly achieved, he showed some remorse or moderation, or 
whatever the reader may please to term it, in permitting her to 
occupy her husband's cottage, and cultivate on no very heavy 
terms, a croft of land adjacent. Her son, Benjamin, in the mean- 
while, grew up to man's estate, and, moved by that impulse which 
makes men seek marriage, even when its end can only be the per- 
petuation of misery, he wedded and brought a wife, and, eventually, 
a son, Reuben, to share the poverty of Beersheba. 

The Laird of Dumbiedikes * had hitherto been moderate in his 
exactions, perhaps because he was ashamed to tax too highly the 
miserable means of support which remained to the widow Butler. 
But when a stout active young fellow appeared as the labourer of 
the croft in question, Dumbiedikes began to think so broad a pair 
of shoulders might bear an additional burden. He regulated, 
indeed, his management of his dependents (who fortunately were but 
few in number) much upon the principle of the carters whom he 
observed loading their carts at a neighbouring coal-hill, and who 
never failed to clap an additional brace of hundred weights on their 
burden, so soon as by any means they had compassed a new horse 
of somewhat superior strength to that which had broken down the 
day before. However reasonable this practice appeared to the 
Laird of Dumbiedikes, he ought to have observed, that it may be 
overdone, and that it infers, as a matter of course, the destruction 
and loss of both horse, cart, and loading. Even so it befell when 
the additional " prestations " came to be demanded of Benjamin 
Butler. A man of few words, and few ideas, but attached to Beer- 
sheba with a feeling like that which a vegetable entertains to the 
■ spot in which it chances to be planted, he neither remonstrated 
with the Laird, nor endeavoured to escape from him, but toiling 
night and day to accomplish the terms of his task-master, fell into 
a burning fever and died. His wife did not long survive him ; and 
as if it had been the fate of this family to be left orphans, our 
Reuben Butler was, about the year 1704-5, left in the same circum- 
stances in which his father had been placed, and under the same 
guardianship, being that of his grandmother, the widow of Monk's 
old trooper. 

The same prospect of misery hung over the head of another 



68 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

tenant of this hard-hearted lord of the soil. This was a tough true- 
blue Presbyterian, called Deans, who, though most obnoxious to 
the Laird on account of principles in church and state, contrived 
to maintain his ground upon the estate by regular payment of mail- 
duties, kain, arriage, carriage, dry multure, lock, gowpen, and 
knaveship, and all the various exactions now commuted for money, 
and summed up in the emphatic word rent. But the years 1700 
and 1 70 1, long remembered in Scotland for dearth and general 
distress, subdued the stout heart of the agricultural whig. Citations 
by the ground officer, decreets of the Baron Court, sequestrations., 
poindings of outside and inside plenishing, flew about his ears as 
fast as ever the tory bullets whistled around those of the Covenan- 
ters at Pentland, Bothwell-Brigg, or Airdsmoss. Struggle as he 
might, and he struggled gallantly, " Douce David Deans " was 
routed horse and foot, and lay at the mercy of his grasping land- 
lord just at the time that Benjamin Butler died. The fate of each 
family was anticipated ; but they who prophesied their expulsion 
to beggary and ruin, were disappointed by an accidental circum- 
stance. 

On the very term-day when their ejection should have taken 
place, when all their neighbours were prepared to pity, and not 
one to assist them, the minister of the parish, as well as a doctor 
from Edinburgh, received a hasty summons to attend the Laird of 
Dumbiedikes. Both were surprised, for his contempt for both 
faculties had been pretty commonly his theme over an extra bottle, 
that is to say, at least once every day. The leech for the soul, and 
he for the body, alighted in the court of the little old manor-house 
at almost the same time ; and when they had gazed a moment at 
each other with some surprise, they in the same breath expressed 
their conviction that Dumbiedikes must needs be very ill indeed, 
since he summoned them both to his presence at once. Ere the 
servant could usher them to his apartment the party was augmented 
by a man of law, Nichil Novit, writing himself procurator before 
the Sheriff-court, for in those days there were no solicitors. This 
latter personage was first summoned to the apartment of the Laird, 
where, after some short space, the soul-curer and the body-curer 
were invited to join him. 

Dumbiedikes had been by this time transported into the best 
bed-room, used only upon occasions of death and marriage, and 
called, from the former of these occupations, the Dead-Room. 
There were in this apartment, besides the sick person himself and 
Mr. Novit, the son and heir of the patient, a tall gawky silly-look- 
ing boy of fourteen or fifteen, and a housekeeper, a good buxom 
figure of a woman, betwixt forty and fifty, who had kept the keys 
and managed matters at Dumbiedikes since the lady's death. It 
was to these attendants that Dumbiedikes addressed himself pretty 
nearly in the following words ; temporal and spiritual matters, the 
care of his health and his affairs, being strangely jumbled in a head 
which was never one of the clearest. 

" These are sair times wi' me, gentlemen and neighbours! amaist 
as ill as at the aughty-nine, when I was rabbled by the college- 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 69 

aners* — They mistook me muckle — they ca'd me a papist, but 
there was never a papist bit about me, minister. — Jock, ye'll take 
warning — it's a debt we maun a' pay, and there stands Nichil 
Novit that will tell ye I was never gude at paying debts in my life. 
— Mr. Novit, ye'll no forget to draw the annual rent that's due on 
the yerl's band — if I pay debt to other folk, I think they suld pay it 
to me — that equals aquals. — Jock, when ye hae naething else to do, 
ye may be aye sticking in a tree ; it will be growing, Jock, when 
ye're sleeping.* My father tauld me sae forty years sin', but I 
ne'er fand time to mind him — Jock, ne'er drink brandy in the 
morning, it files the stamach sair ; gin ye tak a morning's draught, 
let it be aqua mirabilis ; Jenny there maks it weel. — Doctor, my 
breath is growing as scant as a broken- winded piper's, when he has 
played for four-and-twenty hours at a penny wedding. — Jenny, pit 
the cod aneath my head — but it's a' needless ! Mass John, could 
ye think o' rattling ower some bit short prayer, it wad do me gude 
maybe, and keep some queer thoughts out o' my head. Say some- 
thing, man." 

" I cannot use a prayer like a rat-rhyme,'* answered the honest 
clergyman ; " and if you would have your soul redeemed like a 
prey from the fowler, Laird, you must needs show me your state of 
mind." 

" And shouldna ye ken that without my telling you ? " answered 
the patient. "What 1 have I been paying stipend and teind, par- 
sonage and vicarage, for, ever sin' the aughty-nine, an I canna get 
a spell of a prayer fort, the only time I ever asked for ane in my 
life ? — Gang awa wi' your whiggery, if that's a' ye can do ; auld 
Curate Kiltstoup wad hae read half the Prayer-book to me by this 
time — Awa wi' ye ! — Doctor, let's see if ye can do onything better 
for me." 

The Doctor, who had obtained some information in the mean- 
while from the housekeeper on the state of his complaints, assured 
him the medical art could not prolong his life many hours. 

" Then damn Mass John and you baith ! " cried the furious and 
intractable patient. " Did ye come here for naething but to tell me 
that ye canna help me at the pinch ? Out wi' them, Jenny — out o' 
the house ! and, Jock, my curse, and the curse of Cromwell, go wi' 
ye, if ye gie them either fee or bountith, or sae muckle as a black 
pair o' cheverons ! " (gloves.) 

The clergyman and doctor made a speedy retreat out of the 
apartment, while Dumbiedikes fell into one of those transports of 
violent and profane language, which had procured him the surname 
of Damn-me-dikes. " Bring me the brandy bottle, Jenny, ye 
b— — j* he cried, with a voice in which passion contended with 
pain. " I can die as I have lived, without fashing' ony o' them. 
But there's ae thing," he said, sinking his voice — " there's ae fearful 
thing hings about my heart, and an anker of brandy winna wash it 
away. — The Deanses at Woodend ! — I sequestrated them in the 
dear years, and now they are to flit, they'll starve — and that Beer- 
sheba, and that auld trooper's wife and her oe, they'll starve— 
they'll starve ! — Look out, Jock ; what kind o' nicht is't ? " 



70 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" On-ding o' snaw, father," answered Jock, after having opened 
the window, and looked out with great composure. 

"They'll perish in the drifts !" said the expiring sinner— "they'll 
perish wi' cauld !— but I'll be het eneugh, gin a' tales be true." 

This last observation was made under breath, and in a tone 
which made the very attorney shudder. He tried his hand at 
ghostly advice, probably for the first time in his life, and recom- 
mended, as an opiate for the agonized conscience of the Laird, re- 
paration of the injuries he had done to these distressed families, 
which, he observed by the way, the civil law called restitutio in 
integrum. But Mammon was struggling with Remorse for retaining 
his place in a bosom he had so long possessed ; and he partly 
succeeded, as an old tyrant proves often too strong for his insurgent 
rebels. 

" I canna do't," he answered, with a voice of despair. " It would 
kill me to do't — how can ye bid me pay back siller, when ye ken 
how I want it? or dispone Beersheba, when it lies sae weel into my 
ain plaid-nuik? Nature made Dumbiedikes and Beersheba to be ae 
man's land — She did, by— — . Nichil, it wad kill me to part them." 

" But ye maun die, whether or no, Laird," said Mr. Novit ; " and 
maybe ye wad die easier — it's but trying. I'll scroll the disposition 
in nae time." 

" Dinna speak o't, sir," replied Dumbiedikes, " or I'll fling the 
stoup at your head. — But, Jock, lad, ye see how the warld warstles 
wi' me on my death-bed — be kind to the puir creatures the Deanses 
and the Butlers — be kind to them, Jock. Dinna let the warld get 
a grip o' ye, Jock — but keep the gear thegither ! and whate'er ye 
do, dispone Beersheba at no rate. Let the creatures stay at a 
moderate mailmg, and hae bite and soup ; it will maybe be the 
better wi' your father whare he's gaun, lad." 

After these contradictory instructions, the Laird felt his mind so 
much at ease, that he drank three bumpers of brandy continuously, 
and "soughed awa," as Jenny expressed it, in an attempt to sing 
" Deil stick the minister." 

His death made a revolution in favour of the distressed families. 
John Dumbie, now of Dumbiedikes, in his own right, seemed to be 
close and selfish enough ; but wanted the grasping spirit and active 
mind of his father ; and his guardian happened to agree with him 
in opinion, that his father's dying recommendation should b© 
attended to. The tenants, therefore, were not actually turned out 
of doors among the snow wreaths, and were allowed wherewith to 
procure butter-milk and peas-bannocks, which they ate under the 
full force of the original malediction. The cottage of Deans, called 
Woodend, was not very distant from that at Beersheba. Formerly 
there had been little intercourse between the families. Deans was 
a sturdy Scotsman, with all sorts of prejudices against the southern, 
and the spawn of the southern. Moreover, Deans was, as we have 
said, a stanch presbyterian, of the most rigid and unbending ad- 
herence to what he conceived to be the only possible straight line, 
as he was wont to express himself, between right-hand heats and 
extremes, and left-hand defections ; and therefore, he held in high 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 7t 

dread and horror all independents, and whomsoever he supposed 
allied to them. 

But, notwithstanding these national prejudices and religious pro- 
fessions, Deans and the widow Butler were placed in such a situa- 
tion, as naturally and at length created some intimacy between the 
families. They had shared a common danger and a mutual 
deliverance. They needed each other's assistance, like a company, 
who, crossing a mountain stream, are compelled to cling close 
together, lest the current should be too powerful for any who are 
not thus supported. 

On nearer acquaintance, too, Deans abated some of his preju- 
dices. He found old Mrs. Butler, though not thoroughly grounded 
m the extent and bearing of the real testimony against the defec- 
tions of the times, had no opinions in favour of the independent 
party ; neither was she an English woman. Therefore, it was to 
be hoped, that, though she was the widow of an enthusiastic 
corporal of Cromwell's dragoons, her grandson might be neither 
schismatic nor anti-national, two qualities concerning which Good- 
man Deans had as wholesome a terror as against papists and 
malignants. Above all, (for Douce Davie Deans had his weak 
side,) he perceived that widow Butler looked up to him with rever- 
ence, listened to his advice, and compounded for an occasional 
fling at the doctrines of her deceased husband, to which, as we 
have seen, she was by no means warmly attached, in consideration 
of the valuable counsels which the presbyterian afforded her for 
the management of her little farm. These usually concluded with, 
" they may do otherwise in England, neighbour Butler, for aught I 
ken ; " or, " it may be different in foreign parts ; " or, "they wha 
think differently on the great foundation of our covenanted refor- 
mation, overturning and mishguggling the government and dis- 
cipline of the kirk, and breaking down the carved work of our 
Zion, might be for sawing the craft wi' aits j but I say pease, 
pease." And as his advice was shrewd and sensible, though con- 
ceitedly given, it was received with gratitude, and followed with 
respect. 

The intercourse which took place betwixt the families at Beer- 
sheba and Woodend, hecame strict and intimate, at a very early 
period, betwixt Reuben Butler, with whom the reader is already in 
some degree acquainted, and Jeanie Deans, the only child of Douce 
Davie Deans by his first wife, " that singular Christian woman," as 
he was wont to express himself, " whose name was savoury to all 
that knew her for a desirable professor, Christian Menzies in Hoch- 
magirdle." The manner of which intimacy, and the consequences 
thereof, we now proceed to relate. 



73 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 



CHAPTER IX. 

Reuben and Rachel, though as fond as doves, 
Were yet discreet and cautious in their loves, 
Nor would attend to Cupid's wild commands, 
Till cool reflection bade them join their hands. 
When both were poor, they thought it argued ill 
Of hasty love to make them poorer still. 

Crabbe's Parish Register. 

WHILE widow Butler and widower 1 Deans struggled with poverty, 
and the hard and sterile soil of those " parts and portions " of the 
lands of Dumbiedikes which it was their lot to occupy, it became 
gradually apparent that Deans was to gain the strife, and his ally 
in the conflict was to lose it. The former was a man, and not much 
past the prime of life— Mrs. Butler a woman, and declined into the 
vale of years. This, indeed, ought in time to have been balanced 
by the circumstance, that Reuben was growing up to assist his 
grandmother's labours, and that Jeanie Deans, as a girl, could be 
only supposed to add to her father's burdens. But Douce Davie 
Deans knew better things, and so schooled and trained the young 
minion, as he called her, that from the time she could walk, up- 
wards, she was daily employed in some task or other suitable to her 
age and capacity ; a circumstance which, added to her father's daily 
instructions and lectures, tended to give her mind, even when a 
child, a grave, seiious, firm, and reflecting cast. An uncommonly 
strong and healthy temperament, free from all nervous affection 
and every other irregularity, which, attacking the body in its more 
noble functions, so often influences the mind, tended greatly to 
establish this fortitude, simplicity, and decision of character. 

On the other hand, Reuben was weak in constitution, and, 
though not timid in temper, might be safely pronounced anxious, 
doubtful, and apprehensive. He partook of the temperament of 
his mother, who had died of a consumption in early age. He was 
a pale, thin, feeble, sickly boy, and somewhat lame, from an acci- 
dent in early youth. He was, besides, the child of a doting grand- 
mother, whose too solicitous attention to him soon taught him a 
sort of diffidence in himself, with a disposition to overrate his own 
importance, which is one of the very worst consequences that chil- 
dren deduce from over-indulgence. 

Still, however, the two children clung to each other's society, not 
more from habit than from taste. They herded together the handful 
of sheep, with the two or three cows, which their parents turned out 
rather to seek food than actuallyto feed upon the unenclosed common 
of Dumbiedikes. It was there that the two urchins might be seen 
seated beneath a blooming bush of whin, their little faces laid close 
together under the shadow of the same plaid drawn over both their 
heads, while the landscape around was embrowned by an oversha- 
dowing cloud, big with the shower which had driven the children 
to shelter. On other occasions they went together to school, the 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 73 

boy receiving that encouragement and example from his com- 
panion, in crossing the little brooks which intersected their path, 
and encountering cattle, dogs, and other perils, upon their journey, 
which the male sex in such cases usually consider it as their pre- 
rogative to extend to the weaker. But when, seated on the benches 
of the school-house, they began to con their lessons together, 
Reuben, who was as much superior to Jeanie Deans in acuteness of 
intellect, as inferior to her in firmness of constitution, and in that 
insensibility to fatigue and danger which depends on the conforma- 
tion of the nerves, was able fully to requite the kindness and coun- 
tenance with which, in other circumstances, she used to regard him. 
He was decidedly the best scholar at the little parish school ; and 
so gentle was his temper and disposition, that he was rather ad- 
mired than envied by the little mob who occupied the noisy man- 
sion, although he was the declared favourite of the master. Several 
girls, in particular, (for in Scotland they are taught with the boys,) 
longed to be kind to, and comfort the sickly lad, who was so much 
cleverer than his companions. The character of Reuben Butler was 
so calculated as to offer scope both for their sympathy and their 
admiration, the feelings, perhaps, through which the female sex 
(the more deserving part of them at least) is more easily attached. 

But Reuben, naturally reserved and distant, improved none of 
these advantages ; and only became more attached to Jeanie 
Deans,- as the enthusiastic approbation of his master assured him of 
fair prospects in future life, and awakened his ambition. In the 
meantime, every advance that Reuben made in learning (and, con- 
sidering his opportunities, they were uncommonly great) rendered 
him less capable of attending to the domestic duties of his grand- 
mother's farm. While studying the pons asinorum in Euclid, he 
suffered every cuddie upon the common to trespass upon a large 
field of peas belonging to the Laird, and nothing but the active ex- 
ertions of Jeanie Deans, with her little dog Dustiefoot, could have 
saved great loss and consequent punishment. Similar miscarriages 
marked his progress in his classical studies. He read Virgil's 
Georgics till he did not know bear from <barley ; and had nearly 
destroyed the crofts of Beersheba, while attempting to cultivate 
them according to the practice of Columella and Cato the Censor. 

These blunders occasioned grief to his granddame, and discon- 
certed the good opinion which her neighbour, Davie Deans, had for 
some time entertained of Reuben. 

" I see naething ye can mak o' that silly callant, neighbour But- 
ler," said he to the old lady, " unless ye train him to the wark o' 
the ministry. And ne'er was there mair need of poorfu' preachers 
than e'en now in these cauld Gallio days, when men's hearts are 
hardened like the nether millstone, till they come to regard none 
of these things. It's evident this puir callant of yours will never be 
able to do an usefu' day's wark, unless it be as an ambassador from 
our Master ; and I will make it my business to procure a licence 
when he is fit for the same, trusting he will be a shaft cleanly 
polished, ^nd meet to be used in the body of the kirk ; and that he 
shall not turn again, like the sow, to wallow in the mire of heretical 



74 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

extremes and defections, but shall have the wings of a dove, though 
he hath lain among the pots." 

The poor widow gulped down the affront to her husband's prin- 
ciples, implied in this caution, and hastened to take Butler from the 
High School, and encourage him jn the pursuit of mathematics and 
divinity, the only physics and ethics that chanced to be in fashion 
at the time. 

Jeanie Deans was now compelled to part from the companion of 
her labour, her study, and her pastime, and it was with more than 
childish feeling that both children regarded the separation. But 
they were young, and hope was high, and they separated like those 
who hope to meet again at a more auspicious hour. 

While Reuben Butler was acquiring at the University of St. 
Andrews the knowledge necessary for a clergyman, and macerating 
his body with the privations which were necessary in seeking food 
for his mind, his grand-dame became daily less able to struggle 
with her little farm, and was at length obliged to throw it up to the 
new Laird of Dumbiedikes. That great personage was no abso- 
lute Jew, and did not cheat her in making the bargain more than 
was tolerable. He even gave her permission to tenant the house 
in which she had lived with her husband, as long as it should be 
" tenantable ; " only he protested against paying for a farthing of 
repairs, any benevolence which he possessed being of the passive, 
but by no means of the active mood. 

In the meanwhile, from superior shrewdness, skill, and other cir- 
cumstances, some of them purely accidental, Davie Deans gained 
a footing in the world, the possession of some wealth, the reputa- 
tion of more, and a growing disposition to preserve and increase his 
store ; for which, when he thought upon it seriously, he was inclined 
to blame himself. From his knowledge in agriculture, as it was 
then practised, he became a sort of favourite with the Laird, who 
had no great pleasure either in active sports or in society, and was 
wont to end his daily saunter by calling at the cottage of Woodend. 

Being himself a man of slow ideas and confused utterance, Dum- 
biedikes used to sit or stand for half an hour with an old laced hat 
of his father's upon his head, and an empty tobacco-pipe in his 
mouth, with his eyes following Jeanie Deans, or "the lassie," as he 
called her, through the course of her daily domestic labour ; while 
her father, after exhausting the subject of bestial, of ploughs, and 
of harrows, often took an opportunity of going full-sail into contro- 
versial subjects, to which discussions the dignitary listened with 
much seeming patience, but without making any reply, or, indeed, 
as most people thought, without understanding a single word of 
what the orator was saying. Deans, indeed, denied this stoutly, as 
an insult at once to his own talents for expounding hidden truths, 
of which he was a little vain, and to the Laird's capacity of under- 
standing them. He said, " Dumbiedikes was nane o' these flashy 
gentles, wi' lace on their skirts and swords at their tails, that were 
rather for riding on horseback to hell than ganging barefooted to 
heaven. He wasna like his father — nae profane-company keeper 
— nae swearer — nae drinker — nae frequenter of play-house, or 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 75 

music-house, or dancing-house — nae Sabbath breaker — nae imposer 
of aiths, or bonds, or denier of liberty to the flock. — He clave to the 
warld, and the warld's gear, a wee ower muckle, but then there was 
some breathing of a gale upon his spirit," &c. &c. All this honest 
Davie said and believed. 

It is not to be supposed, that, by a father and a man of sense and 
observation, the constant direction of the Laird's eyes towards Jeanie 
was altogether unnoticed. This circumstance, however, made a 
much greater impression upon another member of his family, a 
second helpmate, to wit, whom he had chosen to take to his bosom 
ten years after the death of his first. Some people were of opinion, 
that Douce Davie had been rather surprised into this step, for in 
general, he was no friend to marriages or giving in marriage, and 
seemed rather to regard that state of society as a necessary evil, — 
a thing lawful, and to be tolerated in the imperfect state of our 
nature, but which clipped the wings with which we ought to soar 
upwards, and tethered the soul to its mansion of clay, and the 
creature-comforts of wife and bairns. His own practice, however, 
had in this material point varied from his principles, since, as we 
have seen, he twice knitted for himself this dangerous and ensnar- 
ing entanglement. 

Rebecca, his spouse, had by no means the same horror of matri- 
mony, and as she made marriages in imagination for every neigh- 
bour round, she failed not to indicate a match between Dum- 
biedikes and her step-daughter Jeanie. The good man used regu- 
larly to frown and pshaw whenever this topic was touched upon, 
but usually ended by taking his bonnet and walking out of the 
house to conceal a certain gleam of satisfaction, which, at such a 
suggestion, involuntarily diffused itself over his austere features. 

The more youthful part of my readers may naturally ask, whether 
Jeanie Deans was deserving of this mute attention of the Laird of 
Dumbiedikes, and the historian, with due regard to veracity, is 
compelled to answer, that her personal attractions were of no un- 
common description. She was short, and rather too stoutly made 
for her size, had grey eyes, light-coloured hair, a round good- 
humoured face, much' tanned with the sun, and her only peculiar 
charm was an air of inexpressible serenity, which a good con- 
science, kind feelings, contented temper, and the regular discharge 
of all her duties, spread over her features. There was nothing, it 
may be supposed, very appalling in the form or manners of this 
rustic heroine ; yet, whether from sheepish bashfulness, or from 
want of decision and imperfect knowledge of his own mind on the 
subject, the Laird of Dumbiedikes, with his old laced hat and empty 
tobacco-pipe, came and enjoyed the beatific vision of Jeanie Deans 
day after day, week after week, year after year, without proposing 
to accomplish any of the prophecies of the step-mother. 

This good lady began to grow doubly impatient on the subject, 
when, after having been some years married, she herself presented 
Douce Davie with another daughter, who was named Euphemia, 
by corruption, Effie. It was then that Rebecca began to turn im- 
patient with the slow pace at which the Laird's wooing proceeded, 



7 S THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

judiciously arguing, that, as Lady Dumbiedikes would have but 
little occasion for tocher, the principal part of her gudeman's sub- 
stance would naturally descend to the child by the second mar- 
riage. Other step-dames have tried less laudable means for clear- 
ing the wav to the succession of their own children ; but Rebecca, 
to do her justice, only sought little Effie's advantage through the 
promotion, or which must have generally been accounted such, of 
her elder sister. She therefore tried every female art within the com- 
pass of her simple skill, to bring the Laird to a point ; but had the 
mortification to perceive that her efforts, like those of an unskilful 
angler, only scared the trout she meant to catch. Upon one occa- 
sion, in particular, when she joked with the Laird on the propriety 
of giving a mistress to the house of Dumbiedikes, he was so effec-' 
tually startled, that neither laced hat, tobacco-pipe, nor the intelli- 
gent proprietor of these movables, visited Woodend for a fortnight. 
Rebecca was therefore compelled to leave the Laird to proceed at 
his own snail's pace, convinced, by experience, of the grave-digger's 
aphorism, that your dull ass will not mend his pace for beating. 

Reuben, in the meantime, pursued his studies at the university, 
supplying his wants by teaching the younger lads the knowledge 
he himself acquired, and thus at once gaining the means of main- 
taining himself at the seat of learning, and fixing in his mind the 
elements of what he had already obtained. In this manner, as is 
usual among the poorer students of divinity at Scottish universities, 
he contrived not only to maintain himself according to his simple 
wants, but even to send considerable assistance to his sole remain- 
ing parent, a sacred duty, of which the Scotch are seldom neg- 
ligent. His progress in knowledge of a general kind, as well as in 
the studies proper to his profession, was very considerable, but was 
little remarked, owing to the retired modesty of his disposition, 
which in ho respect qualified him to set off his learning to the best 
advantage. And thus, had Butler been a man given to make com- 
plaints, he had his tale to tell, like others, of unjust preferences, 
bad luck, and hard usage. On these subjects, however, he was 
habitually silent, perhaps from modesty, perhaps from a fouch of 
pride, or perhaps from a conjunction of both. 

He obtained his licence as a preacher of the gospel, with some 
compliments from the presbytery, by whom it was bestowed ; but 
this did not lead to any preferment, and he found it necessary to 
make the cottage at Beersheba his residence for some months, with 
no other income than was afforded by the precarious occupation of 
teaching in one or other of the neighbouring families. After having 
greeted his aged grandmother, his first visit was to Woodend, 
where he was received by Jeanie with warm cordiality, arising from 
recollections which had never been dismissed from her mind, by 
Rebecca with good-humoured hospitality, and by old Deans in a 
mode peculiar to himself. 

Highly as Douce Davie honoured the clergy, it was not upon' 
each individual of the cloth that he bestowed his approbation ; 
and, a little jealous, perhaps, at seeing his youthful acquaintance 
erected into the dignity of a teacher and preacher, he instantly at- 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 77 

tacked him upon various points of controversy, in order to discover 
whether he might not have fallen into some of the snares, defec- 
tions, and desertions of the time. Butler was not only a man of 
stanch presbyterian principles, but was also willing to avoid giving 
pain to his old friend by disputing upon points of little importance ; 
and therefore he might have hoped to have come like refined gold 
out of the furnace of Davie's interrogatories. But the result on 
the mind of that strict investigator was not altogether so favour* 
able as might have been hoped and anticipated. Old Judith 
Butler, who had hobbled that evening as far as Woodend, in order 
to enjoy the congratulations of her neighbours upon Reuben's re- 
turn, and upon his high attainments, of which she was herself not 
a little proud, was somewhat mortified to find that her old friend 
Deans did not enter into the subject with the warmth she expected. 
At first, indeed, he seemed rather silent than dissatisfied ; and it 
was not till Judith had essayed the subject more than once that it 
led to the following dialogue. * 

" Aweel, neibor Deans, I thought ye wad hae been glad to see 
Reuben amang us again, puir fallow." 

" I am glad, Mrs. Butler," was the neighbour's concise answer. 

" Since he has lost his grandfather and his father (praised be 
Him that giveth and taketh !) I ken nae friend he has in the world 
that's been sae like a father to him as the sell o' ye, neibon Deans." 

" God is the only father of the fatherless," said Deans, touching 
his bonnet and looking upwards. " Give honour where it is due, 
gudewife, and not to an unworthy instrument." 

" Aweel, that's your way o' turning it, and nae doubt ye ken 
best ; but I hae kend ye, Davie, send a forpit o' meal to Beersheba 
when there wasna a bow left in the meal-ark at Woodend ; ay, and 
I hae kend ye " 

" Gudewife," said Davie, interrupting her, " these are but idle 
tales to tell me ; fit for naething but to puff up our inward man wi' 
our ain vain acts. I stude beside blessed Alexander Peden, when ' 
I heard him call the death and testimony of our happy martyrs 
but draps of blude and scarts of ink in respect of fitting discharge of 
our duty ; and what suld I think of onything the like of me can do ? " 

" Weel, neibor Deans, ye ken best ; but I maun say that, I am 
sure you are glad to see my bairn again — the halt's gane now, un- 
less he has to walk ower mony miles at a stretch ; and he has a wee 
bit colour in his cheek, that glads my auld een to see it ; and he 
has as decent a black coat as the minister ; and " 

" I am very heartily glad he is weel and thriving," said Mr. 
Deans, with a gravity that seemed intended to cut short the sub- 
ject ; but a woman who is bent upon a point is not easily pushed 
aside from it. 

" And," continued Mrs. Butler, " he can wag his head in a pulpit 
now, neibor Deans, think but o' that — my ain oe — and a'body maun 
sit still and listen to him, as if he were the Paip of Rome." 

" The what ?— the who ?— woman ! " said Deans, with a sternness 
far beyond his usual gravity, as soon as these offensive words had 
struck upon the tympanum of his, ear. 



78 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" Eh, guide us ! " said the poor woman ; " I had forgot what an 
ill will ye had aye at the Paip, and sae had my puir gudeman, 
Stephen Butler. Mony an afternoon he wad sit and take up his testi- 
mony again the Paip, and again baptizing of bairns, and the like." 

" Woman ! " reiterated Deans, " either speak about what ye ken 
something o', or be silent; I say that independency is a foul 
heresy, and anabaptism a damnable and deceiving error, whilk 
suld be rooted out o' the land wi' the fire o' the spiritual, and the 
sword o' the civil magistrate/' 

" Weel, weel, neibor, I'll no say that ye mayna be richt," an- 
swered the submissive Judith. " I am sure ye are richt about the 
sawing and the mawing, the shearing and the leading, and what 
for suld ye no be richt about kirkwark, too ? — But concerning my 
oe, Reuben Butler " 

" Reuben Butler, gudewife," said David with solemnity, " is a lad 
I wish heartily weel to, even as if he were my ain son — but I doubt 
there will be outs and ins in the track of his walk. I muckle fear 
his gifts will get the heels of his grace. He has ower muckle 
human wit and learning, and thinks as muckle about the form of 
the bicker as he does about the healsomeness of the food — he maun 
broider the marriage-garment with lace and passments, or it's no 
gude eneugh for him. And it's like he's something proud o' his 
human gifts and learning, whilk enables him to dress up his doc- 
trine in that fine airy dress. But," added he, at seeing the old 
woman's uneasiness at his discourse, "affliction may gie him a 
jagg, and let the wind out o' him, as out o' a cow that's eaten wet 
clover, and the lad may do weel, and be a burning and a shining 
light ; and I trust it will be yours to see, and his to feel it, and that 
soon." 

Widow Butler was obliged to retire, unable to make anything 
more of her neighbour, whose discourse, though she did not com- 
prehend it, filled her with undefined apprehensions on her grand* 
son's account, and greatly depressed the joy with which she had 
welcomed him on his return. And it must not be concealed, in 
justice to Mr. Deans's discernment, that Butler, in their conference, 
had made a greater display of his learning than the occasion called 
for, or than was likely to be acceptable to the old man, who, accus- 
tomed to consider himself as a person pre-eminently entitled to 
dictate upon theological subjects of controversy, felt rather humbled 
and mortified when learned authorities were placed in array against 
him. In fact, Butler had not escaped the tinge of pedantry which 
naturally flowed from his education, and was apt, on many occa- 
sions, to make parade of his knowledge, when there was no need of 
such vanity. 

Jeanie Deans, however, found no fault with this display of learn- 
ing, but, on the contrary, admired it ; perhaps on the same score 
that her sex are said to admire men of courage, on account of their 
own deficiency in that qualification. The circumstances of their 
family threw the young people constantly together ; their old inti- 
macy was renewed, though upon a footing better adapted to their age ; 
and it became at length understood betwixt them, that their union 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 79 

should be deferred no longer than until Butler should obtain some 
steady means of support, however humble, This, however, was 
not a matter speedily to be accomplished. Plan after plan was 
formed, and plan after plan failed. The good-humoured cheek of 
Jeanie lost the first flush of juvenile freshness ; Reuben's brow 
assumed the gravity of manhood, yet the means of obtaining a 
settlement seemed remote as ever. Fortunately for the lovers, 
their passion was of no ardent or enthusiastic cast ; and a sense of 
duty on both sides induced them to bear, with patient fortitude, the 
protracted interval which divided them from each other. 

In the meanwhile, time did not roll on without effecting his usual 
changes. The widow of Stephen Butler, so long the prop of the 
family of Beersheba, was gathered to her fathers ; and Rebecca, 
the careful spouse of our friend Davie Deans, was also summoned 
from her plans of matrimonial and domestic economy. The morn- 
ing after her death, Reuben Butler went to offer his mite of con- 
solation to his old friend and benefactor. He witnessed, on this 
occasion, a remarkable struggle betwixt the force of natural affec- 
tion, and the religious stoicism, which the sufferer thought it was 
incumbent upon him to maintain under each earthly dispensation, 
whether of weal or woe. 

On his arrival at the cottage, Jeanie, with her eyes overflowing 
with tears, pointed to the little orchard, "in which," she whispered 
with broken accents, " my poor father has been since his misfor- 
tune." Somewhat alarmed at -this account, Butler entered the 
orchard, and advanced slowly towards his old friend, who, seated 
in a small rude arbour, appeared to be sunk in the extremity of his 
affliction. He lifted his eyes somewhat sternly as Butler ap- 
proached, as if offended at the interruption ; but as the young man 
hesitated whether he ought to retreat or advance, he arose, and 
came forward to meet him, with a self-possessed and even digni- 
fied air. 

" Young man," said the sufferer, " lay it not to heart, though the 
righteous perish and the merciful are removed, seeing, it may well 
be said, that they are taken away from the evils to come. Woe to 
roe, were I to shed a tear for the wife of my bosom, when I might 
weep rivers of water for this afflicted Church, cursed as it is with 
carnal seekers and with the dead of heart." 

" I am happy," said Butler, " that you can forget your private 
affliction in your regard for public duty." 

" Forget, Reuben ? " said poor Deans, putting his handkerchief 
to his eyes, — " She's not to be forgotten on this side of time ; but 
He that gives the wound can send the ointment. I declare there 
have been times during this night when my meditation has been so 
wrapt, that I knew not of my heavy loss. It has been with me as 
with the worthy John Semple, called Carsphairn John,* upon a like 
trial, — I have been this night on the banks of Ulai, plucking an 
apple here and there." 

Notwithstanding the assumed fortitude of Deans, which he con- 
ceived to be the discharge of a great Christian duty, he had too 
good a heart not to suffer deeply under this heavy loss. Woodend 



80 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

became altogether distasteful to him ; and as he had obtained both 
substance and experience by his management of that little farm, 
he resolved to employ them as a dairy-farmer, or cow-feeder, as 
they are called in Scotland. The situation he chose for his new 
settlement was at a place called Saint Leonard's Crags, lying be- 
twixt Edinburgh and the mountain called Arthur's Seat, and ad- 
joining to the extensive sheep pastures still named the King's Park, 
from its having been formerly dedicated to the preservation of the 
royal game. Here he rented a small lonely house, about half a 
mile distant from the nearest point of the city, but the site of which, 
with all the adjacent ground, is now occupied by the buildings 
which form the south-eastern suburb. An extensive pasture-ground 
adjoining, which Deans rented from the keeper of the Royal Park, 
enabled him to feed his milk-cows ; and the unceasing industry 
and activity of Jeanie, his eldest daughter, were exerted in making 
the most of their produce. 

She had now less frequent opportunities of seeing Reuben, who 
had been obliged, after various disappointments, to accept the 
subordinate situation of assistant in a parochial school of some 
eminence, at three or four miles' distance from the city. Here he 
distinguished himself, and became acquainted with several respect- 
able burgesses, who, on account of health, or other reasons, chose 
that their children should commence their education in this little " 
village. His prospects were thus gradually brightening, and upon 
each visit which he paid at St. Leonard's he had an- opportunity of 
gliding a hint to this purpose into Jeanie's ear. These visits were 
necessarily very rare, on account of the demands which the duties 
of the school made upon Butler's time. Nor did he dare to make 
them even altogether so frequent as these avocations would permit. 
Deans received him with civility indeed, and even with kindness ; 
but Reuben, as is usual in such cases, imagined that he read his 
purpose in his eyes, and was afraid too premature an explanation 
on the subject would draw down his positive disapproval. Upon 
the whole, therefore, he judged it prudent to call at Saint Leonard's 
just so frequently as old acquaintance and neighbourhood seemed 
to authorize, and no oftener. There was another person who was 
more regular in his visits. 

When Davie Deans intimated to the Laird of Dumbiedikes his 
purpose of " quitting wi' the land and house at Woodend," the 
Laird stared and said nothing. He made his usual visits at the 
usual hour without remark, until the day before the term, when, 
observing the bustle of moving furniture already commenced, the 
great east-country awmrie dragged out of its nook, and standing 
with its shoulder to the company, like an awkward booby about to 
leave the room, the Laird again stared mightily, and was heard to 
ejaculate, " Hegh, sirs ! " Even after the day of departure was 
past and gone, the Laird of Dumbiedikes, at his usual hour, which 
was that at which Davie Deans was wont to " loose the pleugh," pre- 
sented himself before the closed door of the cottage at Woodend, and 
seemed as much astonished at finding it shut against his approach 
as if it was not exactly what he had to expect. On this occasion 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 81 

he was heard to ejaculate, " Gude guide us ! " which, by those who 
knew him, was considered as a very unusual mark of emotion, 
From that moment forward, Dumbiedikes became an altered man. 
and the regularity of his movements, hitherto so exemplary, was as 
totally disconcerted as those of a boy's watch when he has broken 
the main-spring. Like the index of the said watch, did Dumbie- 
dikes spin round the whole bounds of his little property, which 
may be likened unto the dial of the time-piece, with unwonted velo- 
city. There was not a cottage into which he did not 1 enter, nor 
scarce a maiden on whom he did not stare. But so it was, that 
although there were better farm-houses on the land than Woodend, 
and certainly much prettier girls than Jeanie Deans, yet it did 
somehow befall that the blank in the Laird's time was not so 
pleasantly filled up as it had been. There was no seat accommo- 
dated him so well as the " bunker " at Woodend, and no face he 
loved so much to gaze on as Jeanie Deans's. So, after spinning 
round and round his little orbit, and then remaining stationary for 
a week, it seems to have occurred to him, that he was not pinned 
down to circulate on a pivot, like the hands of the watch, but 
possessed the power of shifting his central point, and extending his 
circle if he thought proper. To realize which privilege of change 
of place, he bought a pony from a Highland drover, and with its 
assistance and company stepped, or rather stumbled, as far as 
Saint Leonard's Crags. 

Jeanie Deans, though so much accustomed to the Laird's staring 
that she was sometimes scarce conscious of his presence, had 
nevertheless some occasional fears lest he should call in the organ 
of speech to back those expressions of admiration which he 
bestowed on her through his eyes. Should this happen, farewell, 
she thought, to all chance of an union with Butler. For her father, 
however stout-hearted and independent in civil and religious prin- 
ciples, was not without that respect for the laird of the land, so 
deeply imprinted on the Scottish tenantry of the period. More- 
over, if he did not positively dislike Butler, yet his fund of carnal 
learning was often the object of sarcasms on David's part, which 
were perhaps founded in jealousy, and which certainly indicated no 
partiality for the party against whom they were launched. And, 
lastly, the match with Dumbiedikes would have presented irresis- 
tible charms to one who used to complain that he felt himself apt 
to take " ower grit an armfu' o' the warld." So that, upon the 
whole, the Laird's diurnal visits were disagreeable to Jeanie from 
apprehension of future consequences, and it served much to console 
her, upon removing from the spot where she was bred and born, 
that she had seen the last of Dumbiedikes, his laced hat, and 
tobacco-pipe. The poor girl no more expected he could muster 
courage to follow her to Saint Leonard's Crags, than that any of 
her apple-trees or cabbages which she had left rooted in the 
" yard " at Woodend, would spontaneously, and unaided, have 
undertaken the same journey. It was, therefore, with much more 
surprise than pleasure that, on the sixth day after their removal to 
Saint Leonard's, she beheld Dumbiedikes arrive, laced hat, 



82 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

tobacco-pipe, and all, and, with the self-same greeting of " How's 
a' wi' ye, Jeanie ?— Whare's the gudeman ? " assume as nearly as 
he could the same position in the cottage at Saint Leonard's which 
he had so long and so regularly occupied at Woodend. He was no 
sooner, however, seated, than with an unusual exertion of his 
powers of conversation, he added, "Jeanie— I say, Jeanie, woman" 
—here he extended his hand towards her shoulder with all the 
fingers spread out as if to clutch it, but in so bashful and awkward 
a manner, that when she whisked herself beyond its reach, the paw 
remained suspended in the air with the palm open, like the claw of 
a heraldic griffin—" Jeanie," continued the swain, in this moment of 
inspiration, — " I say, Jeanie, it's a braw day out-by, and the roads 
are no that ill for boot-hose." 

" The deil's in the daidling body," muttered Jeanie between her 
teeth ; " wha wad hae thoucht o' his daikering out this length ? " 
And she afterwards confessed that she threw a little of this un- 
gracious sentiment into her accent and manner ; for her father 
being abroad, and the "body," as she irreverently termed the 
landed proprietor, " looking unco gleg and canty, she didna ken 
what he might be coming out wi' next." 

Her frowns, however, acted as a complete sedative,* and the 
Laird relapsed from that day into his former taciturn habits, visiting 
the cowfeeder's cottage three or four times every week, when the 
weather permitted, with apparently no other purpose than to stare 
at Jeanie Deans, while Douce Davie poured forth his eloquence • 
upon the controversies and testimonies of the day. 



CHAPTER X. 

Her air, her manners, all who saw admired, 
Courteous, though coy, and gentle, though retired ; 
The joy of youth and health her eyes display'd, 
And ease of heart her every look convey'd. 

Crabbe. 

The visits of the Laird thus again sunk into matters of ordinary 
course, from which nothing was to be expected or apprehended. 
If a lover could have gained a fair one as a snake is said to 
fascinate a bird, by pertinaciously gazing on her with great stupid 
greenish eyes, which began now to be occasionally aided by 
spectacles, unquestionably Dumbiedikes would have been the 
person to perform the feat. But the art of fascination seems 
among the artes perdita, and I cannot learn that this most perti- 
nacious of starers produced any effect by his attentions beyond an 
occasional yawn. 

In the meanwhile, the object of his gaze was gradually attaining 
the verge of youth, and approaching to what is called in females 
the middle age, which is impolitely held to begin a few years earlier 
with their more fragile sex than with men. Many people would 
have been of opinion, that the Laird would have done better to 



I 



s 3 




E Mir fi 



■B''..?' ' 





■fa 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 83 

have transferred his glances to an object possessed of tar superior ' 
charms to Jeanie's, even when Jeanie's were in their bloom, who 
began now to be distinguished by all who visited the cottage at 
St. Leonard's Crags. 

Effie Deans, under the tender and affectionate care of her sister, 
had now shot up into a beautiful and blooming girl. Her Grecian- 
shaped head was profusely rich in waving ringlets of brown hair, 
which, confined by a blue snood of silk, and shading a laughing 
Hebe countenance, seemed the picture of health, pleasure, and 
contentment. Her brown russet short-gown set off a shape, which 
time, perhaps, might be expected to render too robust, the frequent 
objection to Scottish beauty, but which, in her present early age, 
•was slender and taper, with that graceful and easy sweep of outline 
which at once indicates health and beautiful proportion of parts. 

These growing charms, in all their juvenile profusion, had no 
power to shake the steadfast mind, or divert the fixed gaze, of the 
constant Laird of Dumbiedikes. But there was scarce another eye 
that could behold this living picture of health and beauty, without 
pausing on it with pleasure. The traveller stopped his weary horse 
on the eve of entering the city which was the end of his journey, 
to gaze at the sylph-like form that tripped by him, with her milk- 
pail poised on her head, bearing herself so erect, and stepping so 
light and free under her burden, that it seemed rather an ornament 
than an encumbrance. The lads of the neighbouring suburb, who 
held their evening rendezvous for putting the stone, casting the 
hammer, playing at long bowls, and other athletic exercises, 
watched the motions of Effie Deans, and contended with each 
other which should have the good fortune to attract her attention. 
Even the rigid Presbyterians of her father's persuasion, who held 
each indulgence of the eye and sense to be a snare at least, if not 
a crime, were surprised into a moment's delight while gazing on a 
creature so exquisite, — instantly checked by a sigh, reproaching at 
once their own weakness, and mourning that a creature so fair 
should share in the common and hereditary guilt and imperfection 
of our nature. She was currently entitled the Lily of St.. 
Leonard's, a name which she deserved as much by her guileless 
purity of thought, speech, and action, as by her uncommon loveli- 
ness of face and person. 

Yet there were points in Effie's character, which gave rise not 
only to strange doubt and anxiety on the part of Douce David 
Deans, whose ideas were rigid, as may easily be supposed, upon 
the subject of youthful amusements, but even of serious apprehen- 
sion to her more indulgent sister. The children of the Scotch of 
the inferior classes are usually spoiled by the early indulgence of 
their parents ; how, wherefore, and to what degree, the lively and 
instructive narrative of the amiable and accomplished authoress of 
" Glenburnie "* has saved me and all future scribblers the trouble 
of recording. Effie had had a double share of this inconsiderate 
and misjudged kindness. Even the strictness of her father's prin- 
ciples could not condemn the sports of infancy and childhood ; 
and to the good old man, his younger daughter, the child of his 

b a 



84 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

old age, seemed a child for some years after she attained the years 
of womanhood, was still called the " bit lassie," and " little Effie," 
and was permitted to run up and down uncontrolled, unless upon 
the Sabbath, or at the times of family worship. Her sister, with 
all the love and care of a mother, could not be supposed to 
possess the same authoritative influence ; and that which she had 
hitherto exercised became gradually limited and diminished as 
Erne's advancing years entitled her, in her own conceit at least, to 
the right of independence and free agency. With all the innocence 
and goodness of disposition, therefore, which we have described, 
the Lily of St. Leonard's possessed a little fund of self-conceit 
and obstinacy, and some warmth and irritability of temper, partly 
natural perhaps, but certainly much increased by the unrestrained 
freedom of her childhood. Her character will be best illustrated 
by a cottage evening scene. 

The careful father was absent in his well-stocked byre, foddering 
those useful and patient animals on whose produce his living 
depended, and the summer evening was beginning to close in, 
when Jeanie Deans began to be very anxious for the appearance 
of her sister, and to fear that she would not reach home before 
her father returned from the labour of the evening, when it was 
his custom to have "family exercise," and when she knew that 
Erne's absence would give him the most serious displeasure. 
These apprehensions hung heavier upon her mind, because, for 
several preceding evenings, Effie had disappeared about the same 
time, and her stay, at first so brief as scarce to be_ noticed, had 
been gradually protracted to half an hour, and an hour, and on the 
present occasion had considerably exceeded even this last limit. 
And now, Jeanie stood at the door, with her hand before her eyes 
to avoid the rays of the level sun, and looked alternately along the 
various tracks which led towards their dwelling, to see if she 
could descry the nymph-like form of her sister. There waj a 
wall and a stile which separated the royal domain, or King's 
Park, as it is called, from the public road ; to this pass she fre- 
quently directed her attention, 'when she saw two persons appear 
there somewhat suddenly, as if they had walked close by the side 
of the wall to screen themselves from observation. One of them, 
a man, drew back hastily ; the other, a female, crossed the stile, 
and advanced towards her — It was Effie. She met her sister with 
that affected liveliness of manner, which, in her rank, and some- 
times in those above it, females occasionally assume to hide sur- 
prise or confusion ; and she carolled as she came — 

" The elfin knight sat on the brae, 

The broom grows bonny, the broom grows fair ; 

And by tt "Ye came lilting a lady so gay, 

And we t>urna gang down to the broom nae mair." 

" Whisht, Effie,'' said her sister ; " our father's coming out o' the 
byre."— The damsel stinted in her song. — " Whare hae ye been sae 
late at e'en ? " 

" It's no late, lass," answered Effie. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 85 

" It's chappit eight on every clock o' the toun, and the sun's 
gaun doun ahint the Corstorphine hills — Whare can ye hae been 
sae late ? " 

"Nae gate,'' answered Effie. 

" And wha was that parted wi' you at the stile ? " 

" Naebody," replied Effie, once more. 

" Nae gate ? — Naebody ? — I wish it may be a richt gate, and a 
richt body, that keeps folk out sae late at e'en, Effie." 

"What needs ye be aye speering then at folk?" retorted Effie. 
" I'm sure, if ye'll ask nae questions, I'll tell ye nae lees. I never 
ask what brings the Laird of Dumbiedikes glowering here like a 
wull-cat, (only his een's greener, and no sae gleg,) day after day, 
till we are a' like to gaunt our chafts aff." 

" Because ye ken very weel he comes to see our father," said 
Jeanie, in answer to this pert remark. 

" And Dominie Butler — Does he come to see our father, that's 
sae ta'en wi' his Latin words?" said Effie, delighted to find that, by 
carrying the war into the enemy's country, she could divert the 
threatened attack upon herself, and with the petulance of youth she 
pursued her triumph over her prudent elder sister. She looked at 
her with a sly air, in which there was something like irony, as she 
chanted, in a low but marked tone, a scrap of an old Scotch song — 

" Through the kirkyard * 

I met wi' the Laird, 

The silly puir body he said me nae harm ; 
But just ere 'twas dark 
I met wi' the clerk" 

Here the songstress stopped, looked full at her sister, and, ob- 
serving the tear gather in her eyes, she suddenly flung her arms 
round her neck, and kissed them away. Jeanie, though hurt and 
displeased, was unable to resist the caresses of this untaught child 
of nature, whose good and evil seemed to flow rather from impulse 
than from reflection. But as she returned the sisterly kiss in token 
of perfect reconciliation, she could not suppress the gentle reproof 
— " Effie, if ye will learn fule sangs, ye micht mak a kinder use o' 
them." 

" And so I micht, Jeanie," continued the girl, clinging to her 
sister's neck ; " and I wish I had never learned ane o' them — and 
I wish we had never come here — and I wish my tongue had been 
blistered or I had vexed ye." 

" Never mind that, Effie," replied the affectionate sister ; " I 
canna be muckle vexed wi' onything ye say to me — but O dinna 
vex our father ! " 

" I will not — I will not," replied Effie ; " and if there were as 
mony dances the morn's nicht as there are merry dancers in the 
north firmament on a frosty e'en, I winna budge an inch to gang 
near ane o' them." 

" Dance ! " echoed Jeanie Deans in astonishment. " O, Effie, 
what could take ye to a dance ?" 

It is very possible, that, in the communicative mood into which 



S6 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

the Lily of St. Leonard's was now surprised, she might have given 
her sister her unreserved confidence, and saved me the pain of 
telling a melancholy tale ; but at the moment the word dance was 
uttered, it reached the ear of old David Deans, who had turned the 
corner of the house, and came upon his daughters ere they were 
aware of his presence. The word prelate, or even the word pope, 
could hardly have produced so appalling an effect upon David's 
ear ; for, of all exercises, that of dancing, which he termed a volun- 
tary and regular fit of distraction, he deemed most destructive of 
serious thoughts, and the readiest inlet to all sort of licentiousness ; 
and he accounted the encouraging, and even permitting, assemblies 
or meetings, whether among those of high or low degree, for this 
fantastic and absurd purpose, or for that of dramatic representa- 
tions, as one of the most flagrant proofs of defection and causes of 
wrath. The pronouncing of the word dance by his own daughters, 
and at his own door, now drove him beyond the verge of patience. 
" Dance !" he exclaimed. " Dance ! — dance, said ye? I daur ye, 
•limmers that ye are, to name sic a word at my door-cheek ! It's a 
dissohrte profane pastime, practised by the Israelites only at their 
base and brutal worship of the Golden Calf at Bethel, and by the un- 
happy lass wha danced aif the head of John the Baptist, upon whilk 
chapter I will exercise this nicht for your farther instruction, since 
ye need it sae muckle, nothing doubting that she has cause to rue' 
the day, lang or this time, that e'er she suld hae shook a limb on sic 
an errand. Better for her to hae been born a cripple, and carried frae 
door to door, like auld Bessie Bowie, begging bawbees, than to be a 
king's daughter, fiddling and flinging the gate she did. I hae often 
wondered that ony ane that ever bent a knee for the richt purpose, 
should ever daur to crook a hough to fyke and fling at piper's wind 
and fiddler's squealing. And I bless God, (with that singular 
worthy, Peter Walker the packman at Bristo-Port,*) that ordered 
my lot in my dancing days, so that fear of my head and throat, 
dread of bloody rope and swift bullet, and trenchant swords and 
pain of boots and thumkins, cauld and hunger, wetness and weari- 
ness, stopped the lichtness of my head, and the wantonness of my 
feet. And now, if I hear ye, quean lassies, sae muckle as name 
dancing, or think there's sic a thing in this warld as flinging to 
fiddler's sounds and piper's springs, as sure as my father's spirit is 
with the just, ye shall be no more either charge, or concern o' mine ! 
Gang in, then — gang in, then, hinnies," he added, in a softer tone, 
for the tears of both daughters, but especially those of Effie, began 
to flow very fast, — " Gang in, dears, and we'll seek grace to pre- 
serve us frae all manner of profane folly, whilk causeth to sin, and 
promoteth the kingdom of darkness, warring with the kingdom of 
light." 

The objurgation of David Deans, however well meant, was un- 
happily timed. It created a division of feelings in Erne's bosom, 
and deterred her from her intended confidence in her sister. " She 
wad haud me nae better than the dirt below her feet," said Effie to 
herself, "were I to confess I hae danced wi' him four times on the 
green down by, and ance at Maggie Macqueen's ; and she'll mavbe 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 87 

hing it ower my head that she'll tell my father, and then she wad be 
mistress and mair. But I'll no gang back there again. I'm resolved 
711 no gang back. I'll lay in a leaf o' my Bible,* and that's very 
near as if I had made an aith, that I winna gang back." And she 
kept her vow for a week, during which she was unusually cross and 
fretful, blemishes which had never before been observed in her 
temper, except during a moment of contradiction. 

There was something in all this so mysterious as considerably to 
alarm the prudent and affectionate Jeanie, the more so as she 
judged it unkind to her sister to mention to their father grounds of 
anxiety which might arise from her own imagination. Besides, her 
respect for the good old man did not prevent her from being aware 
that he was both hot-tempered and positive, and she sometimes 
suspected that he carried his dislike to youthful amusements beyond 
the verge that religion and reason demanded. Jeanie had sense 
enough to see that a sudden and severe curb upon her sister's 
hitherto unrestrained freedom might be rather productive of 
harm than good, and that Erne, in the headstrong wilfulness of 
youth, was likely to make what might be overstrained in her 
father's precepts an excuse to herself for neglecting them altogether. 
In the higher classes, a damsel, however giddy, is still under the 
dominion of etiquette, and subject to the surveillance of mammas 
and chaperons ; but the country girl, who snatches her moment of 
gaiety during the intervals of labour, is under no such guardianship 
or restraint, and her amusement becomes so much the more 
hazardous. Jeanie saw all this with much distress of mind, when 
a circumstance occurred which appeared calculated to relieve her 
anxiety. 

Mrs. Saddletree, with whom our readers have already been made 
acquainted, chanced to be a distant relation of Douce David Deans, 
and as she was a woman orderly in her life and conversation, and, 
moreover, of good substance, a sort of acquaintance was formally 
kept up between the families. Now, this careful dame, about a 
year and a half before our story commences, chanced to need, in 
the line of her profession, a better sort of servant, or rather shop- 
woman. " Mr. Saddletree," she said, " was never in the shop when 
he could get his nose within the Parliament House, and it was an 
awkward thing for a woman-bddy to be standing among bundles o' 
barkened leather her lane, selling saddles and'bridles ; and she had 
cast her eyes upon her far-awa cousin Effie Deans, as just the very 
sort of lassie she would want to keep her in countenance on such 
occasions." 

In this proposal there was much that pleased old David, — there 
was bed, board, and bountith — it was a decent situation — trie lassie 
would be under Mrs. Saddletree's eye, who had an upright walk, 
and lived close by the Tolbooth Kirk, in which might still be heard 
the comforting doctrines of one of those few ministers of the Kirk 
of Scotland who had not bent the knee unto Baal, according to 
David's expression, or become accessory to the course of national 
defections, — union, toleration, patronages, and a bundle of prelatical 
Erastian oaths which had been imposed on the church since the 



88 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

Revolution, and particularly in the reign of " the late woman," (as 
he called Queen Anne,) the last of that unhappy race of Stewarts. 
In the good man's security concerning the soundness of the theo- 
logical doctrine which his daughter was to hear, he was nothing 
disturbed on account of the snares of a different kind, to which a 
creature so beautiful, .young, and wilful, might be exposed in the 
centre of a populous and corrupted city. The fact is, that he 
thought with so much horror on all approaches to irregularities of 
the nature most to be dreaded in such cases, that he would as soon 
have suspected and guarded against Effie's being induced to become 
guilty of the crime of murder. He only regretted that she should 
live under the same roof with such a worldly-wise man as Bartoline 
Saddletree, whom David never suspected as being an ass as he was, 
but considered as one really endowed with all the legal knowledge 
to which he made pretension, and only liked him the worse for 
possessing it. The lawyers, especially those amongst them who . 
sat as ruling elders in the General Assembly of the Kirk, had been 
forward in promoting the measures of patronage, of the abjuration 
oath, and others, which, in the opinion of David Deans, were a 
breaking down of the carved work of the sanctuary, and an intru- 
sion upon the liberties of the kirk. Upon the dangers of listening 
to the doctrines of a legalized formalist, such as Saddletree, David 
gave his daughter many lectures ; so much so, that he had time to 
touch but slightly on the dangers of chambering, company-keeping, 
and promiscuous dancing, to which, at her time of life, most people 
would have thought Effie more exposed, than to the risk of theo- 
retical error in her religious faith. 

Jeanie parted from her sister, with a mixed feeling of regret, and 
apprehension, and hope. She could not be so confident concerning 
Effie's prudence as her father, for she had observed, her more 
narrowly, had more sympathy with her feelings, and could better 
estimate the temptations to which she was exposed. On the other 
hand, Mrs. Saddletree was an observing, shrewd, notable woman, 
entitled to exercise over Effie the full authority of a mistress, and 
likely to do so strictly, yet with kindness. Her removal to Saddle- 
tree's, it was most probable, would also serve to break off some idle 
acquaintances, which Jeanie suspected her sister to have formed in 
the neighbouring suburb. Upon the whole, then, she viewed her 
departure from Saint Leonard's with pleasure, and it was not until 
the very moment of their parting for the first time in their lives, 
that she felt the full force of sisterly sorrow. While they repeatedly 
kissed each other's cheeks and wrung each other's hands, Jeanie 
took that moment of affectionate sympathy, to press upon her sister 
the necessity of the utmost caution in her conduct while residing in 
.Edinburgh. Effie listened, without once raising her large dark 
eyelashes, from which the drops fell so fast as almost to resemble a 
fountain. At the conclusion she sobbed again, kissed her sister, 
promised to recollect all the good counsel she had given her, and 
they parted. 

During the first few weeks, Effie was all that her kinswoman ex- 
pected, and even more. But with time there came a relaxation of 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 89 

that early zeal which she manifested in Mrs. Saddletree's service. 
To borrow once again from the poet, who so correctly and beauti- 
fully describes living manners, — 

" Something there was, — what, none presumed to say, — 
Clouds lightly passing on a summer's day ; 
Whispers and hints, which went from ear to ear, 
And mix'd reports no judge on earth could clear." 

During this interval, Mrs. Saddletree was sometimes displeased by 
Erne's lingering when she was sent upon errands about the shop 
business, and sometimes by a little degree of impatience which she 
manifested at being rebuked on such occasions. But she good- 
naturedly allowed, that the first was very natural to a girl to whom 
everything in Edinburgh was new, and the other was only the 
petulance of a spoiled child, when subjected to the yoke of domestic 
discipline for the first time. Attention and submission could not 
be learned at once — Holy-Rood was not built in a clay — use would 
make perfect. 

It seemed as if the considerate old lady had presaged truly. 
Ere many months had passed, Effie became almost wedded to her 
duties, though she no longer discharged them with the laughing 
cheek and light step, which at first had attracted every customer. 
Her mistress sometimes observed her in tears, but they were signs 
of secret sorrow, which she concealed as often as she saw them 
attract notice. Time wore on, her cheek grew pale, and her step 
heavy. The cause of these changes could not have escaped the 
matronly eye of Mrs. Saddletree, but she was chiefly confined by 
indisposition to her bedroom for a considerable time during the 
latter part of Erne's service. This interval was marked by symp- 
toms of anguish almost amounting to despair. The utmost efforts 
of the poor girl to command her fits of hysterical agony were often 
totally unavailing, and the mistakes which she made in the shop 
the while were so numerous and so provoking, that Bartoline Sad- 
dletree, who, during his wife's illness, was obliged to take closer 
charge of the business than consisted with his study of the weightier 
matters of the law, lost all patience with the girl, who, in his law 
Latin, and without much respect to gender, he declared ought to 
be cognosced by inquest of a jury, asfatuus, ficriosus, and natu- 
raliter idiota. Neighbours, also, and fellow-servants, remarked 
with malicious curiosity or degrading pity, the disfigured shape, 
loose dress, and pale cheeks, of the once beautiful and still inte- 
resting girl. But to no one would she grant her confidence, an- 
swering all taunts with bitter sarcasm, and all serious expostulation 
with sullen denial or with floods of tears. 

At length, when Mrs. Saddletree's recovery was likely to permit 
her wonted attention to the regulation of her household, Effie 
Deans, as if unwilling to face an investigation made by the autho- 
rity of her mistress, asked permission of Bartoline to go home for 
a week or two, assigning indisposition, and the wish of trying the 
benefit of repose and the change of air, as the motives of her re- 
quest. Sharp-eyed as a lynx (or conceiving himself ,to be so) in 



90 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

the nice sharp quillits of legal discussion, Bartoline was as dull at 
drawing inferences from the occurrences of common life as any 
Dutch professor of mathematics. He suffered Erne to depart with- 
out much suspicion, and without any inquiry. 

It was afterwards found that a period of a week intervened be- 
twixt her leaving her master's house and arriving at St. Leonard's. 
She made her appearance before her sister in a state rather resem- 
bling the spectre than the living substance of the gay and beau- 
tiful girl who had left her father's cottage for the first time scarce 
seventeen months before. The lingering illness of her mistress 
had, for the last few months, given her a plea for confining herself 
entirely to the dusky precincts of the shop in the Lawnmarket, 
and Jeanie was so much occupied, during the same period, with 
the concerns of her father's household, that she had rarely found 
leisure for a walk into the city, and a brief and hurried visit to her 
sister. The young women, therefore, had scarcely seen each other 
for several months, nor had a single scandalous surmise reached 
the ears of the secluded inhabitants of the cottage at St. Leonard's. 
Jeanie, therefore, terrified to death at her sister's appearance, at 
first overwhelmed her with inquiries, to which the unfortunate 
young woman returned for a time incoherent and rambling an- 
swers, and finally fell into a hysterical fit. Rendered too certain 
of her sister's misfortune, Jeanie had now the dreadful alternative 
of communicating her ruin to her father, or of endeavouring to 
conceal it from him. To all questions concerning the name or 
rank of her seducer, and the fate of the being to whom her fall 
had given birth, Efne remained mute as the grave, to which she 
seemed hastening ; and indeed the least allusion to either seemed 
to drive her to distraction. Her sister, in distress and in despair, 
was about to repair to Mrs. Saddletree to consult her experience, 
and at the same time to obtain what lights she could upon this most 
unhappy affair, when she was saved that trouble by a new stroke 
of fate, which seemed to carry misfortune to the uttermost. 

David Deans had been alarmed at the state of health in which 
his daughter, had returned to her paternal residence ; but Jeanie 
had contrived to divert him from particular and specific inquiry. 
It was, therefore, like a clap of thunder to the poor old man, when, 
just as the hour of noon had brought the visit of the Laird of 
Dumbiedikes as usual, other and sterner as well as most unex- 
pected guests arrived at the cottage of St. Leonard's. These were 
the officers of justice, with a warrant of justiciary to search for and 
apprehend Euphemia, or Efne, Deans, accused of the crime of 
child-murder. The stunning weight of a blow- so totally unex- 
pected, bore down the old man, who had in his early youth resisted 
the brow of military and civil tyranny, though backed with swords 
and guns, tortures and gibbets. He fell extended and senseless 
upon his own hearth ; and the men, happy to escape from the scene 
of his awakening, raised, with, rude humanity, the object of their 
warrant from her bed, and placed her in a coach, which they had 
brought with them. The hasty remedies which Jeanie had applied 
to bring back her father's senses were scarce begun to operate, 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 91 

when the noise of the wheels in motion recalled her attention to 
her miserable sister. To run shrieking after the carriage was the 
first vain effort of her distraction, but she was stopped by one or 
two female neighbours, assembled by the extraordinary appearance 
of a coach in that sequestered place, who almost forced her back 
to her father's house. The deep and sympathetic affliction of these 
poor people, by whom the little family at St. Leonard's were held 
in high regard, filled the house with lamentation. Even Dumbie- 
dikes was moved from his wonted apathy, and, groping for his 
purse as he spoke, ejaculated, " Jeanie, woman ! — Jeanie, woman ! 
dinna greet — it's sad wark, but siller will help it;" and he drew out 
his purse as he spoke. 

The old man had now raised himself from the ground, and, looking 
about him as if he missed something, seemed gradually to recover 
the sense of his wretchedness. " Where," he said, with a voice 
that made the roof ring, " where is the vile harlot, that has dis- 
graced the blood of an honest man ? — Where is she that has no 
place among us, but has come foul with her sins, like the Evil One, 
among the children of God ? — Where is she, Jeanie ? — Bring her 
before me, that I may kill her with a word and a look ! " 

All. hastened around him with their appropriate sources of con- 
solation — the Laird with his purse, Jeanie with burnt feathers and 
strong waters, and the women with their exhortations. " O neigh- 
bour-^O Mr. Deans, it's a. sair trial, doubtless — but think of the 
Rock of Ages, neighbour— think of the promise ! " 

" And 1 do think of it, neighbours — and I bless God that I can 
think of it, even in the wrack and ruin of a' that's nearest and 
dearest to me — But to be the father of a cast-away — a profligate — • 
a bloody Zipporah— a mere murderess ! — O, how will the wicked 
exult in the high places of their wickedness ! — the prelatists, and 
the latitudinarians, and the hand-waled murderers, whose hands 
are hard as horn wi' hauding the slaughter-weapons — they will 
push out the lip, and say that we are even such as themselves. 
Sair, sair I am grieved, neighbours, for the poor cast-away — for 
the child of mine old age — but sairer for the stumbling-block and 
scandal it will be to all tender and honest souls ! " 

"Davie — winna siller do't?" insinuated the laird*, still proffering 
his green purse, which was full of guineas. 

" I tell ye, Dumbiedikes," said Deans, " that if telling down my 
haill substance could hae saved her frae this black snare, I wad 
hae walked out wi' naething but my bonnet and my staff to beg an 
awmous for God's sake, and ca'd mysell an happy man — But if a 
dollar, or a plack, or the nineteenth part of a boddle, wad save her 
open guilt and open shame frae open punishment, that purchase 
wad Davie Deans never make ! — Na, na ; an eye for an eye, a 
tooth for a tooth, life for life, blood for blood — it's the law of man, 
and it's the law of God. — Leave me, sirs — leave me — I maun 
warstle wi' this trial in privacy and on my knees." 

Jeanie, now in some degree restored to the power of thought,' 
joined in the same request. The next day found the father and 
daughter still in the depth of affliction, but the father sternly sup- 



q 2 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

porting his load of ill through a proud sense of religious duty, and 
the daughter anxiously suppressing her own feelings to avoid again 
awakening his. Thus was it with the afflicted family until the 
morning after Porteous's death, a period at which we are now 
arrived. 



CHAPTER XL 



Is all the counsel that we two have shared, 
The sister's vows, the hours that we have spent 
When we have chid the hasty-footed time 
For parting us — Oh ! and is all forgot ? 

Midsummer Nights Dream. 

We have been a long while in conducting Butler to the door of 
the cottage at St. Leonard's ; yet the space which we have occu- 
pied in the preceding narrative does not exceed in length that 
which he actually spent on Salisbury Crags on the morning which 
succeeded the execution done upon Porteous by the rioters. For 
this delay he had his own motives. He wished to collect his 
thoughts, strangely agitated as they were, first by the melancholy 
news of Effie Deans's situation, and afterwards by the frightful 
scene which he had witnessed. In the situation also in which he 
stood with respect to Jeanie and her father, some ceremony, at 
least some choice of fitting time and season, was necessary to wait 
upon them. Eight in the morning was then the ordinary hour for 
breakfast; and he resolved that it should arrive before he made his 
appearance in their cottage. 

Never did hours pass so heavily. Butler shifted his place, and 
enlarged his circle to while away the time, and heard the huge bell 
of St. Giles's toll each successive hour in swelling tones, which 
were instantly attested by those of the other steeples in succession. 
He had heard seven struck in this manner, when he began to 
think he might venture to approach nearer to St. Leonard's, from 
which he was still a mile distant. Accordingly he descended from 
his lofty station as low as the bottom of the valley which divides 
Salisbury Crags from those small rocks which take their name from 
Saint Leonard. It is, as many of my readers may know, a deep, 
wild, grassy valley, scattered with huge rocks and fragments which « 
have descended from the cliffs and steep ascent to the east. 

This sequestered dell, as well as other places of the open pastu- 
rage of the King's Park, was, about this time, often the resort of 
the gallants of the time who had affairs of honour to discuss with 
the sword. Duels were then very common in Scotland, for the 
gentry were at once idle, haughty, fierce, divided by faction, and 
addicted to intemperance, so that there lacked neither provocation, 
nor inclination to resent it when given ; and the sword, which was 
part of every gentleman's dress, was the only weapon used for the de- 
cision of such differences. When, therefore, Butler observed a young 
man, skulking, apparently to avoid observation, among the scattered 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 93 

rocks at some distance from the footpath, he was naturally led to sup- 
pose that he had sought this lonely spot upon that evil errand. He 
was so strongly impressed with this, that, notwithstanding his own 
distress of mind, he could not, according to his sense of duty as a 
clergyman, pass this person without speaking to him. There are 
times, thought he to himself, when the slightest interference may 
avert a great calamity — when a word spoken in season may do 
more for prevention than the eloquence of Tully could do for re- 
medying evil — And for my own griefs, be they as they may, I shall 
feel them the lighter, if they divert me not from the prosecution of 
my duty. 

Thus thinking and feeling, he quitted the ordinary path, and 
advanced nearer the object he had noticed. The man at first 
directed his course towards the hill, in order, as it appeared to 
avoid him ; but when he saw that Butler seemed disposed to follow 
him, he adjusted his hat fiercely, turned round, and came forward, 
as if to meet and defy scrutiny. 

Butler had an opportunity of accurately studying his features as 
they advanced slowly to meet each other. The stranger seemed 
about twenty-five years old. His dress was of a kind which could 
hardly be said to indicate his rank "with certainty, for it was such 
as young gentlemen sometimes wore while on active exercise in the 
morning, and which, therefore, was imitated by those of the inferior 
ranks, as young clerks and tradesmen, because its cheapness ren- 
dered it attainable, while it approached more nearly to the apparel 
of youths of fashion than any other which the manners of the times 
permitted them to wear. If his air and manner could be trusted, 
however, this person seemed rather to be dressed under than above 
his rank ; for his carriage was bold and somewhat supercilious, 
his step easy and free, his manner daring and unconstrained. His 
stature was of the middle size, or rather above it, his limbs well- 
proportioned, yet not so strong as to infer the reproach of clumsi- 
ness. His features were uncommonly handsome, and all about 
him would have been interesting and prepossessing, but for that 
indescribable expression which habitual dissipation gives to the 
countenance, joined with a certain audacity in look and manner, 
of that kind which is often assumed as a mask for confusion and 
apprehension. 

Butler and the stranger met — surveyed each other — when, as the 
latter, slightly touching his hat, was about to pass by him, Butler, 
while he returned the salutation, observed, " A fine morning, sir — 
You are on the hill early." 

" I have business here," said the young man, in a tone meant to 
repress farther inquiry. 

" I do not doubt it, sir," said Butler. " I trust you will forgive 
my hoping that it is of a lawful kind ? " 

" Sir," said the other, with marked surprise, " I never forgive im- 
.-.pertinence, nor can I conceive what title you have to hope any- 
thing about what no way concerns you." 

" I am a soldier, sir," said Butler, "and have a charge to arrest 
evil-doers in the name of my Master." 



94 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" A soldier ! " said the young man, stepping back, and fiercely 
laying his hand on his sword—" A soldier, and arrest me ! Did you 
reckon what your life was worth, before you took the commission 
upon vou ? " 

" You mistake me, sir," said Butler gravely ; " neither my warfare 
nor my warrant are of this world. I am a preacher of the gospel, 
and have power, in my Master's name, to command the peace 
upon earth and good- will towards men, which was proclaimed with 
the gospel." 

" A minister ! " said the stranger, carelessly, and wich an expres- 
sion approaching to scorn. " I know the gentlemen of your cloth 
in Scotland claim a strange right of intermeddling with men's private 
affairs. But I have been abroad, and know better than to be priest- 
ridden." 

" Sir, if it be true that any of my cloth, or, it might be more de- 
cently said, of my calling, interfere with men's private affairs, for 
the gratification either of idle curiosity, or for worse motives, you 
cannot have learned a better lesson abroad than to contemn such 
practices. But, in my Master's work, I am called to be busy in 
season and out of season ; and, conscious as I am of a pure motive, 
it were better for me to incur your contempt for speaking, than the 
correction of my own conscience for being silent." 

" In the name of the devil ! " said the young man impatiently, 
" say what you have to say, then ; though whom you take me for, 
or what earthly concern you have with me, a stranger to you, or 
v/ith my actions and motives, of which you can know nothing, I can- 
not conjecture for an instant." 

" You are about," said Butler, " to violate one of your country's 
wisest laws — you are about, which is much more dreadful, to violate 
a law, which God himself has implanted within our nature, and 
written, as it were, in the table of our hearts, to which every thrill of 
our nerves is responsive." 

"And what is the law you speak of? " said the stranger, in a hol- 
low and somewhat disturbed accent. 

" Thou shalt do no murder," said Butler, with a deep and solemn 
voice. 

The young man visibly started, and looked considerably appalled. 
Butler perceived he had made a favourable impression, and resolved 
to follow it up. " Think," he said, " young man," laying his hand 
kindly upon the stranger's shoulder, " what an awful alternative 
you voluntarily choose for yourself, to kill or be killed. Think what 
it is to rush uncalled into the presertce of an offended Deity, your 
heart fermenting with evil passions, your hand hot from the steel 
you had been urging, with your best skill and malice, against the 
breast of a fellow-creature. Or, suppose yourself the scarce less 
wretched survivor, with the guilt of Cain, the first murderer, in 
your heart, with his stamp upon your brow — that stamp which 
struck all who gazed on him with unutterable horror, and by 
which the murderer is made manifest to all who look upon him. 
Think " 

The stranger gradually withdrew himself from under the hand of 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 95 

his monitor ; and, pulling his hat over his brows, thus interrupted 
him. " Your meaning, sir, I dare say, is excellent, but you arc 
throwing your advice away. I am not in this place with' violent 
intentions against any one. I may be bad enough — you priests say 
all men are so — but I am here for the purpose of saving life, not of 
taking it away. If you wish to spend your time rather in doing a 
good action than in talking about you know not what, I will give 
you an opportunity. Do you see yonder crag to the right, over 
which appears the chimney of a lone house ? Go thither, inquire 
for one Jeanie Deans, the daughter of the goodman ; let her know 
that he she wots of remained here from daybreak till this hour, 
expecting to see her, and that he can abide no longer. Tell her, 
she must meet me at the Hunter's Bog to-night, as the moon rises 
behind St. Anthony's Hill, or that she will make a desperate man 
of me." 

" Who, or what are you," replied Butler, exceedingly and most 
unpleasantly surprised, " who charge me with such an errand ? " 

" I am the devil ! " answered the young man hastily. 

Butler stepped instinctively back, and commended himself inter- 
nally to Heaven ; for, though a wise and strong-minded man, he 
was neither wiser nor more strong-minded than those of his age 
and education, with whom, to disbelieve witchcraft or spectres, was 
held an undeniable proof of atheism. 

The stranger went on without observing his emotion. "Yes ! call 
me Apollyon, Abaddon, whatever name you shall choose, as a 
clergyman acquainted with the upper and lower circles of spiritual 
denomination, to call me by, you shall not find an appellation more 
odious to him that bears it, than is mine own." 

This sentence was spoken with the bitterness of self-upbraiding, 
and a contortion of visage absolutely demoniacal. Butler, though 
a man brave by principle, if not by constitution, was overawed ; 
for intensity of mental distress has in it a sort of sublimity which 
repels and overawes all men, but especially those of kind and sym- 
pathetic dispositions. The stranger turned abruptly from Butler 
as he spoke, but instantly returned, and, coming up to him closely 
and boldly, said, in a fierce, determined tone, " I have told you who 
and what I am — who, and what are you ? What is your name ? " 

" Butler," answered the person to whom this abrupt question 
was addressed, surprised into answering it by the sudden and 
fierce manner of the querist — " Reuben Butler, a preacher of the 
gospel." 

At this answer, the stranger again plucked more deep over his 
brows the hat which he had thrown back in his former agitation. 
" Butler ! " he repeated, — " the assistant of the schoolmaster at 
Libberton?" 

" The same," answered Butler, composedly. 

The stranger covered his face with his hand, as if on sudden re- 
flection, and then turned away, but stopped when he had walked a 
few paces ; and seeing Butler follow him with his eyes, called out 
in a stern yet suppressed tone, just as if he had exactly calculated 
that his accents should not be heard a yard beyond the spot on 



96 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

which Butler stood. " Go your way, and do mine errand. Do not 
100k after me. I will neither descend through the bowels of these 
rocks, nor vanish in a flash of fire ; and yet the eye that seeks to 
trace my motions shall have reason to curse it was ever shrouded 
by eyelid or .eyelash. Begone, and look not behind you. Tell 
Jeanie Deans, that when the moon rises I shall expect to meet her 
at Nicol Muschat's Cairn, beneath Saint Anthony's Chapel." 

As he uttered these words, he turned and took the road against 
the hill, with a haste that seemed as peremptory as his tone of 
authority. 

Dreading he knew not what of additional misery to a lot which 
seemed little capable of receiving augmentation, and desperate at 
the idea that any living man should dare to send so extraordinary 
a request, couched in terms so imperious, to the half-betrothed ob- 
ject of his early and only affection, Butler strode hastily towards 
the cottage, in order to ascertain how far this daring and rude gal- 
lant was actually entitled to press on Jeanie Deans a request, 
which no prudent, and scarce any modest young woman, was likely 
to comply with. 

Butler was by nature neither jealous nor superstitious ; yet the 
feelings which lead to those moods of the mind were rooted in his 
heart, as a portion derived from the common stock of humanity. 
It was maddening to think that a profligate gallant, such as the 
manner and tone of the stranger evinced him to be, should have it 
in his power to command forth his future bride and plighted true 
love, at a place so improper, and an hour so unseasonable. Yet the 
tone in which the stranger spoke had nothing of the soft half- 
breathed voice proper to the seducer who solicits an assignation ; it 
was bold, fierce, and imperative, and had less of love in it than of 
menace and intimidation. 

The suggestions of superstition seemed more plausible, had But- 
ler's mind been very accessible to them. Was this indeed the 
Roaring Lion, who goeth about seeking whom he may devour ? This 
was a question which pressed itself on Butler's mind with an ear- 
nestness that cannot be conceived by those who live in the present 
day. The fiery eye, the abrupt demeanour, the occasionally harsh 
yet studiously subdued tone of voice, — the features, handsome, but 
now clouded with pride, now disturbed by suspicion, now inflamed 
with passion — those dark" hazel eyes which he sometimes shaded 
with his cap, as if he were averse to have them seen while they were 
occupied with keenly observing the motions and bearing of others 
— those eyes that were now turbid with melancholy, now gleaming 
with scorn, and now sparkling with fury — was it the passions of a 
mere mortal they expressed, or the emotions of a fiend, who seeks, 
and seeks in vain, to conceal his fiendish designs under the bor- 
rowed mask of manly beauty ? The whole partook of the mien, 
language, and port of the ruined archangel ; and, imperfectly as we 
have been able to describe it, the effect of the interview upon But- 
ler's nerves, shaken as they were at the time by the horrors of the 
preceding night, were greater than his understanding warranted, or 
his pride cared to submit to. The very place where he had met this 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 97 

singular person was desecrated, as it were, and unhallowed, owing 
to many violent deaths, both in duels and by suicide, which had in 
former times taken place there ; and the place which he had named 
as a rendezvous at so late an hour, was held in general to be ac- 
cursed, from a frightful and cruel murder which had been there 
committed by the wretch from whom the place took its name, upon 
the person of his own wife.* It was in such places, according to 
the belief of that period, (when the laws against witchcraft were still 
in fresh observance, and had even lately been acted upon,) that evil 
spirits had power to make themselves visible to human eyes, and to 
practise upon the feelings and senses of mankind. Suspicions, 
founded on such circumstances, rushed on Butler's mind, unpre- 
pared as it was, by any previous course of reasoning, to deny that 
which all of his time, country, and profession believed ; but common 
sense rejected these vain ideas as inconsistent, if not with possi- 
bility, at least with the general rules by which the universe is 
governed, — a deviation from which, as Butler well argued with 
himself, ought not to be admitted as probable, upon any but the 
plainest and most incontrovertible evidence. An earthly lover, 
however, or a young man, who, from whatever cause, had the right 
of exercising such summary and unceremonious authority over the 
object of his long-settled, and apparently sincerely returned affec- 
tion, was an object scarce less appalling to his mind, than those 
which superstition suggested. 

His limbs exhausted with fatigue, his mind harassed with 
anxiety, and with painful doubts and recollections, Butler dragged 
himself up the ascent from the valley to St. Leonard's crags, and 
presented himself at the door of Deans's habitation,' with feelings 
much akin to the miserable reflections and fears of its inhabitants. 



CHAPTER XII. 

Then she stretch'd out her lily hand, 
And for to do her best ; 
" Hae back thy faith and troth, Willie, 
God gie thy soul good rest ! " 

Old Ballad. 

" COME in," answered the low and sweet-toned voice he loved 
best to hear, as Butler tapped at the door of the cottage. He lifted 
the latch, and found himself under the roof of affliction. Jeanie 
was unable to trust herself with more than one glance towards her 
lover, whom she now met under circumstances so agonizing to her 
feelings, and at the same time so humbling to her honest pride. It 
is well known, that much, both of what is good and bad in the 
Scottish national character, arises out of the intimacy of their family 
connections. " To be come of honest folk," that is, of people who 
have borne a fair and unstained reputation, is an advantage as 
highly prized among the lower Scotch, as the emphatic counterpart, 



9 8 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" to be of a good family," is valued among their gentry. The worth 
and respectability of one member of a peasant's family is always 
accounted by themselves and others, not only a matter of honest 
pride, but a guarantee for the good conduct of the whole. On the 
contrary, such a melancholy stain as was now flung on one of the 
children of Deans, extended its disgrace to all connected with him, 
and Jeanie felt herself lowered at once, in her own eyes, and in 
those of her lover. It was in vain that she repressed this feeling, 
as far subordinate and too selfish to be mingled with, her sorrow 
for her sister's calamity. Nature prevailed ; and while she shed 
tears for her sister's distress and danger, there mingled with them 
bitter drops of grief for her own degradation. 

As Butler entered, the old man was seated by the fire with his 
well-worn pocket Bible in his hands, the companion of the wander- 
ings and dangers of his youth, and bequeathed to him on the scaf- 
fold by one of those, who, in the year 1686, sealed their enthusiastic 
principles with their blood. The sun sent its fays through a small 
window at the old man's back, and, " shining motty through the 
reek," to use the expression of a bard of that time and country, 
illumined the grey hairs of the old man, and the sacred page which 
he studied. His features, far from handsome, and rather harsh 
and severe, had yet from their expression of habitual gravity, and 
contempt for earthly things, an expression of stoical dignity amidst 
their sternness. He boasted, in no small degree, the attributes 
which Southey ascribes to the ancient Scandinavians, whom he 
terms " t firm to inflict, and stubborn to endure." The whole formed 
a picture, of which the lights might have been given by Rembrandt, 
but the outline would have required the force and vigour of Michael 
Angelo. • 

Deans lifted his eye as Butler entered, and instantly withdrew it 1 
as from an object which gave him at once surprise and sudden 
pain. He had assumed such high ground with this carnal-witted 
scholar, as he had in his pride termed Butler, that to meet him of 
all men, under feelings of humiliation, aggravated his misfortune, 
and was a consummation like that of the dying chief in the old 
ballad — " Earl Percy sees my fall ! " 

Deans raised the Bible with his left hand, so as partly to screen 
his face, and putting back his right as far as he could, held it 
towards Butler in that position, at the same time turning his body 
from him, as if to prevent his seeing the working of his counte- 
nance. Butler clasped the extended hand which had supported 
his orphan infancy, wept over it, and in vain endeavoured to say 
more than the words — " God comfort you — God comfort you !" 

" He will — he doth, my friend," said Deans, assuming firmness 
as he discovered the agitation of his guest ; " he doth, now, and he 
will yet more in his own gude time. I have been ower proud of 
my sufferings in a gude cause, Reuben, and now I am to be tried 
with those whilk will turn my pride and glory into a reproach and 
a hissing. How muckle better I hae thoucht mysell than them 
that lay saft, fed sweet, and drank deep, when I was in the moss- 
haggs and moors, wi' precious Donald Cameron, and worthy Mr. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 99 

Blackadder, 'called Guess-again ; and how proud I was o' being 
made a spectacle to men and angels, having stood on their pillory 
at the Canongate afore I was fifteen years old, for the cause of a 
National Covenant ? To think, Reuben, that I, wha hae been sae 
honoured and exalted in my youth, nay, when I was but a hafflins 
callant, and that hae borne testimony again the defections o' the 
times yearly, monthly, daily, hourly, minutely, striving and testify- 
ing with uplifted hand and voice, crying aloud, and sparing not, 
against all great national snares, as the nation-wasting and church- 
sinking abomination of union, toleration, and patronage, imposed 
by the last woman of that unhappy race of Stewarts ; also against 
the infringements and invasions of the just powers of eldership, 
whereanent I uttered my paper, called, a ' Cry of an Howl in the 
Desert,' printed at the Bow-head, and sold by all flying stationers 
in town and country — and now " 

Here he paused. It may well be supposed that Butler, though 
not absolutely coinciding in all the good old man's ideas about 
church government, had too much consideration and humanity to 
interrupt him, while he reckoned up with conscious pride his "suf- 
ferings, and the constancy of his testimony. On the contrary, 
when he paused under the influence of the bitter recollections of 
the moment, Butler instantly threw in his mite of encourage- 
ment. 

" You have been well known, my old and revered friend, a true 
and tried follower of the Cross ; one who, as Saint Jerome hath it, 
' [per infamiam et bonam famam grassari ad ' immortalitateml 'which 
may be freely rendered, ' who rusheth on to immortal life, through 
bad report, and good report.' You have been one of those to whom 
the tender and fearful souls cry during the midnight solitude — 
' Watchman, what of the night ? — Watchman, what of the night ? ' 
■ — And, assuredly, this heavy dispensation, as it comes not without 
divine permission, so it comes not without its special commission 
and use." 

" I do receive it as such," said poor Deans, returning the grasp 
of Butler's hand ; " and if I have not been taught to read the Scrip- 
ture in any other tongue but my native Scottish," (even in his dis- 
tress Butler's Latin quotation had not escaped his notice,) " I have, 
nevertheless, so learned them, that I trust to bear even this crook 
in my lot with submission. But, oh ! Reuben Butler, the kirk, of 
whilk, though unworthy, I have yet been thought a polished shaft, 
and meet to be a pillar, holding, from my youth upward, the place 
of ruling elder — what will the lightsome and profane think of the 
guide that cannot keep his own family from stumbling ? How will 
they take up their song and their reproach, when they see that the- 
children of professors are liable to as foul backsliding as the off- 
spring of Belial ! But I will bear my cross with the comfort, that 
whatever showed like goodness in me or mine, was but like the 
light that shines frae creeping insects, on the brae-side, in a dark 
nicht — it kythes bright to the ee, because all is dark around it ; 
but when the morn comes on the mountains, it is but a puir crawl- 
ing kail-worm after a'. And sae it shows, wi' ony rag of human 

G 2 



loo THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

righteousness, or formal law-work, that we may pit round us to 
cover our shame." 

As he pronounced these words, the door again opened, and Mr. 
Bartoline Saddletree entered, his three-pointed hat set far back on 
his head, with a silk handkerchief beneath it, to keep it in that cool 
position, his gold-headed cane in his hand, and his whole deport- 
ment that of a wealthy burgher, who might; one day look to have a 
share in the magistracy, if not actually to hold the curule chair 
itself. 

Rochefoucault, who has torn the veil from so many foul gangrenes 
of the human heart, says, we find something not altogether unplea- 
sant to us in the misfortunes of our best friends. Mr. Saddletree 
would have been very angry had any one told him that he felt 
pleasure in the disaster of poor Erne Deans, and the disgrace of 
her family ; and yet there is great question whether the gratification 
of playing the person of importance, inquiring, investigating, and 
laying down the law on the whole affair, did not offer, to say the 
least, full consolation for the pain which pure sympathy gave him 
on account of his wife's kinswoman. He had now got a piece of 
real judicial business by the end, instead of being obliged, as \ras 
his common case, to intrude his opinion where it was neither wished 
nor wanted ; and felt as happy in the exchange as a boy when he 
gets his first new watch, which actually goes when wound up, and 
has real hands and a true dial-plate. But besides this subject for 
legal disquisition, Bartoline's brains were also overloaded with the 
affair of Porteous, his violent death, and all its probable conse- 
quences to the city and community. It was what the French 
call tembarras des richesses, the confusion arising from too much 
mental wealth. He. walked in with a consciousness of double im- 
portance, full fraught with the superiority of one who possesses 
more information than the company into which he enters, and who 
feels a right to discharge his learning on them without mercy. 
" Good-morning, Mr. Deans, — good-morrow to you, Mr. Butler, — 
I was not aware that you were acquainted with Mr. Deans." 

Butler made some slight answer ; his reasons may be readily 
imagined for not making his connection with the family, which, in 
his eyes, had something of tender mystery, a frequent subject of 
conversation with indifferent persons, such as Saddletree. 

The worthy burgher, in the plenitude of self-importance, now 
sate down upon a chair, wiped his brow, collected his breath, and 
made the first experiment of the resolved pith of his lungs, in a 
deep and dignified sigh, resembling a groan in sound and intona- 
tion — " Awfu' times these, neighbour Deans, awfu' times ! " 

" Sinfu', shamefu', heaven-daring times," answered Deans, in a 
lower and more subdued tone. 

" For my part," continued Saddletree, swelling with importance, 
"what between the distress of my friends, and my poor aula 
country, ony wit that ever I had may be said to have abandoned 
me, sae that I sometimes think myself as ignorant as if I were inter 
rustices. Here when I arise in the morning, wi' my mind just 
arranged touching what's to be done in puir Effie's misfortune, and 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. rii 

hae gotten the haill statute at my finger-ends, the mob maun get 
up and string Jock Porteous to a dyester's beam, and ding a' thing 
out of my head again." 

Deeply as he was distressed with his own domestic calamity, 
Deans could not help expressing some interest in the news. Saddle- 
tree immediately entered on details of the insurrection and its con- 
sequences, while Butler took the occasion to seek some private 
conversation with Jeanie Deans. She gave him the opportunity he 
sought, by leaving the room, as if in prosecution of some part , of 
her morning labour. Butler followed her in a few minutes, leaving 
Deans so closely engaged by his busy visitor, that there was little 
chance of his observing their absence. 

The scene of their interview was an outer apartment, where 
Jeanie was used to busy herself in arranging the productions of her 
dairy. When Butler found an opportunity of stealing after her into 
this place, he found her silent, dejected, and ready to burst into 
tears. Instead of the active industry with which she had been 
accustomed, even while in the act of speaking, to employ her hands 
in some useful branch of household business, she was seated listless 
in a corner, sinking apparently under the weight of her own 
thoughts. Yet the instant he entered, she dried her eyes, and, with 
the simplicity and openness of her character, immediately entered 
on conversation. 

" I am glad you have come in, Mr. Butler," said she, " for — for — 
for I wished to tell ye, that all maun be ended between you and me 
— it's best for baith our sakes." 

"Ended !" said Butler, in surprise ; "and for what should it be 
ended ? — I grant this is a heavy dispensation, but it lies neither at 
your door nor mine — it's an evil of God's sending, and it must be 
borne ; but it cannot break plighted troth, Jeanie, while they that 
plighted their word wish to keep it." 

" But, Reuben," said the young woman, looking at him affec- 
tionately, " I ken weel that ye think mair of me than yourself; and, 
Reuben, I can only in requital think mair of your weal than of my 
ain. Ye are a man of spotless name, bred to God's ministry, and 
a' men say that ye will some day rise high in the kirk, though 
poverty keep ye doun e'en now. Poverty is a bad back-friend, 
Reuben, and that ye ken ower weel ; but ill-fame is a waur ane, 
and that is a truth ye sail never learn through my means." 

"What do you mean?" said Butler, eagerly and impatiently; 
" or how do you connect your sister's guilt, if guilt there be, which, 
I trust in God, may yet be disproved, with our engagement ?— how 
can that affect you or me ? " 

" How can you ask me that, Mr. Butler ? Will this stain, d'ye 
think, ever be forgotten, as lang as our heads are abune the grand ? 
Will it not stick to us, and to our bairns, and to their very bairns' 
bairns ? To hae been the child of an honest man, might hae been 

saying something for me and mine ; but to be the sister of a 

O my God ! " — With this exclamation her resolution failed, and she 
burst into a passionate fit of tears. 

The lover used every effort to induce her to compose herself, and 



102 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

at length succeeded ; but she only resumed her composure to ex- 
press herself with the same positiveness as before. " No, Reuben, 
I'll bring disgrace hame to nae man's hearth ; my ain distresses I 
can bear, and I maun bear, bu^ there is nae occasion for buckling 
them on other folk's shouthers. I will bear my load alone — the 
back is made for the burden." 

A lover is by charter wayward and suspicious ; and Jeanie's 
readiness to renounce their engagement, under pretence of zeal for 
his peace of mind and respectability of character, seemed to poor 
Butler to form a portentous combination with the commission of 
the stranger he had met with that morning. His voice faltered as 
he asked, " whether nothing but a sense of her sister's present dis- 
tress occasioned her to talk in that manner ? " 

"And what else can do sae ? " she replied with simplicity. " Is 
it not ten long years since we spoke together in this way ? " 

" Ten years ! " said Butler. " It's a long time— sufficient, per- 
haps for a woman to weary " 

" To weary of her auld gown,'' said Jeanie, " and to wish for a 
new ane if she likes to be brave, but not long enough to weary of a 
friend— The eye may wish change, but the heart never." 
" Never ! " said Reuben, — " that's a bold promise." 
" But not more bauld than true," said Jeanie, with the same quiet 
simplicity which attended her manner in joy and grief, in ordinary 
affairs, and in those which most interested her feelings. 

Butler paused, and looking at her fixedly—" I am charged," he 
said, " with a message to you, Jeanie." 

" Indeed ! From whom ? Or what can ony ane have to say 
tome?" 

" It is from a stranger," said Butler, affecting to speak with an 
indifference which his voice belied — " A young man whom I met 
this morning in the Park." 

" Mercy ! " said Jeanie, eagerly ; " and what did he say ? " 
" That he did not see you at the hour he expected, but required 
you should meet him alone at Muschat's Cairn this night, so soon 
as the moon rises." 

" Tell him," said Jeanie, hastily, " I shall certainly come." 
" May I ask," said Butler, his suspicions increasing at the ready 
alacrity of the answer, " who this man is to whom you are so willing 
to give the meeting at a place and hour so uncommon ? " 

" Folk maun do muckle they have little will to do, in this world," 
replied Jeanie. 

" Granted," said her lover ; " but what compels you to this ? — 
who is this person ? What I saw of him was not very favourable 
— who, or what is he ? " 

" I do not know ! " replied Jeanie, composedly. 
" You do not know ! " said Butler, stepping impatiently through 
the apartment — " You purpose to meet a young man whom you do 
not know, at such a time, and in a place so lonely — you say you 
are compelled to do this— and yet you say you do not know the 
person who exercises such an influence over you ! — Jeanie, what 
am I to think of this ? " 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 103 

" Think only, Reuben, that I speak truth, as if I were to answer 
at the last day. — I do not ken this man — I do not even ken that I 
ever saw him ; and yet I must give him the meeting he asks— 
there's life and death upon it." 

" Will- you not tell your father, or take him with you ?" said Butler. 

" I cannot," said Jeanie ; " I have no permission." 

"Will you let me go with you ? I will wait in the Park till night- 
fall, and join you when you set out." 

" It is impossible," said Jeanie ; " there maunna be mortal crea- 
ture within hearing of our conference." 

" Have you considered well the nature of what you are going to 
do ? — the time — the place — an unknown and suspicious character ? 
■ — Why, if he had asked to see you in this house, your father sitting 
in the next room, and within call, at such an hour, you should have 
refused to see him." 

" My weird maim be fulfilled, Mr. Butler ; my life and my safety 
are in God's hands, but 111 not spare to risk either of them on the 
errand I am gaun to do." 

" Then, Jeanie," said Butler, much displeased, " we must indeed 
break short off, and bid farewell. When there can be no confi- 
dence betwixt a man and his plighted wife on such a momentous 
topic, it is a sign that she has no longer the regard for him that 
makes their engagement safe and suitable." 

Jeanie looked at him and sighed. " I thought," she said, " that , 
I had brought myself to bear this parting — but — but— I did not 
ken that we were to part in unkindness. But I am a woman and 
you are a man — it may be different wi' you — if your mind is made 
easier by thinking sae hardly of me, I would not ask you to think 
otherwise." 

" You are," said Butler, " what you have always been — wiser, 
better, and less selfish in your native feelings, than I can be, with 
all the helps philosophy can give to a Christian. — But why — why 
will you persevere in an undertaking so desperate ? Why will you 
not let me be your assistant — your protector," or at least your 
adviser ? " 

" Just because I cannot, and I dare not," answered Jeanie. — " But 
hark, what's that ? Surely my father is no weel ? " 

In fact, the voices in the next room became obstreperously loud 
of a sudden, the cause of which vociferation it is necessary to 
explain before we go farther. 

When Jeanie and Butler retired, Mr. Saddletree entered upon the 
business which chiefly interested the family. In the commence- 
ment of their conversation he found old Deans, who, in his usual 
state of mind, was no granter of propositions, so much subdued by 
a deep sense of his daughter's danger and disgrace, that he heard 
without replying to, or perhaps without understanding, one or two 
learned disquisitions on the nature of the crime imputed to her 
charge, and on the steps which ought to be taken in consequence. 
His only answer at each pause was, " I am no misdoubting that you 
wuss us weel — your wife's our far-awa cousin." 

Encouraged by these symptoms of acquiescence, Saddletree, who, 



104 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

as an amateur of the law, had a supreme deference for all consti- 
tuted authorities, again recurred to his other topic of interest, the 
murder, namely, of Porteous, and pronounced a severe censure on 
the parties concerned. 

"These are kittle times— kittle times, Mr. Deans, when the people 
tak' the power of life and death out of the hands of the rightful 
magistrate into their ain rough grip. I am of opinion, and so ,1 
believe will Mr. Crossmyloof and the Privy-Council, that this rising 
in effeir of war, to take away the life of a reprieved man, will prove 
little better than perduellion." 

" If I hadna that on my mind whilk is ill to bear, Mr. Saddle- 
tree," said Deans, " I wad mak bold to dispute that point wi' you." 

" How could ye dispute what's plain law, man ? " said Saddle- 
tree, somewhat contemptuously ; " there's no a callant that e'er 
carried a pock wi' a process in't, but will tell you that perduellion 
is the warst and maist virulent kind of treason, being an open con- 
vocating of the king's lieges against his authority (mair especially 
in arms, and by touk of drum, to baith whilk accessories my een 
and lugs bore witness), and muckle warse than lese-majesty, or the 
concealment of a treasonable purpose — It winna bear a dispute, 
neighbour." 

" But it will, though," retorted Douce Davie Deans ; " I tell ye it 
will bear a dispute — I never like your cauld, legal, formal doctrines, 
neighbour Saddletree. I haud unco little by the Parliament House, 
since the awfu' downfall of the hopes of honest folk that followed 
the Revolution." 

" But what wad ye hae had, Mr. Deans ? " said Saddletree im- 
patiently; "didna ye get baith liberty and conscience made fast, 
and settled by tailzie on you and your heirs for ever ? " 

" Mr. Saddletree," retorted Deans, " I ken ye are one of those 
that are wise after the manner of this world, and that ye haud 
your part, and cast in your portion, wi' the lang-heads and lang- 
gowns, and keep with the smart witty-pated lawyers of this our 
land — Weary on the dark and dolefu' cast that they hae gien this 
unhappy kingdom, when their black hands of defection were clasped 
in the red hands of our sworn murtherers : when those who had 
numbered the towers of our Zion, and marked the bulwarks of 
Reformation, saw their hope turned into a snare, and their rejoicing 
into weeping." 

" I canna understand this, neighbour," answered Saddletree. " I 
am an honest presbyterian of the Kirk of Scotland, and stand by her 
and the General Assembly, and the due administration of justice 
by the fifteen Lords o' Session and the five Lords o' Justiciary." 

" Out upon ye, Mr. Saddletree ! " exclaimed David, who, in ar* 
opportunity of giving his testimony on the offences and backslidings 
of the land, forgot for a moment his own domestic calamity — " out 
upon your General Assembly, and the back of my hand to your 
Court o' Session ! — What is the tane but a waefu' bunch o' cauld- 
rife professors and ministers, that sate bien and warm when the 
persecuted remnant were warstling wi' hunger, and cauld, and 
fear o' death, and danger o' fire and sword, upon wet brae-sides, 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 



105 



peat-haggs, and flow-mosses, and that now creep out of their holes, 
like bluebottle flees in a blink of sunshine, to take the pu'pits and 
places of better folk — of them that witnessed, and testified, and 
fought, and endured pit, prison-house, and transportation beyond 
seas ? — A bonny bike there's o' them ! — And for your Court o' 
Session — — " 

" Ye may say what ye will o' the General Assembly," said Saddle- 
tree, interrupting him, " and let them clear them that kens them ; 
but as for the Lords o' Session, forby that they are my next-door 
neighbours, I would have ye ken, for your ain regulation, that to 
raise scandal anent them, whilk is termed to murmur again them, 
is a crime sui generis — sui generis, Mr. Deans — ken ye what that 
amounts to ? " 

" I ken little o' the language of Antichrist," said Deans ; " and I 
care less than little what carnal courts may call the speeches of 
honest men. And as to murmur again them, it's what a' the folk 
that loses their pleas, and nine-tenths o' them that win them, will 
be gay sure to be guilty in. Sae I wad hae ye ken that I haud 
a' your gleg-tongued advocates, that sell their knowledge for pieces 
of silver, and your worldly-wise judges, that will gie three days of 
hearing in presence to a debate about the peeling of an ingan, and 
no ae half-hour to the gospel testimony, as legalists and formalists, 
countenancing, by sentences, and quirks, and cunning terms of 
law, the late begun courses of national defections — union, tolera- 
tion, patronages, and Yerastian prelatic oaths. As for the soul and 
body-killing Court o' Justiciary " 

The habit of considering his life as dedicated to bear testimony 
in behalf of what he deemed the suffering and deserted cause of 
true religion, had swept honest David along with it thus far ; but 
with the mention of the criminal court, the recollection of the dis- 
astrous condition of his daughter rushed at once on his mind; he 
stopped short in the midst of his triumphant declamation, pressed 
his hands against his forehead, and remained silent. 

Saddletree was somewhat moved, but apparently not so much so 
as to induce him to relinquish the privilege of prosing in his turn, 
afforded him by David's sudden silence. " Nae doubt, neighbour," 
he said, " it's a sair thing to hae to do wi' courts of law, unless it be 
to improve ane's knowledge and practique, by waiting on as ■* 
hearer ; and touching this unhappy affair of Effle — ye'll hae seen 
the dittay, doubtless ? " He dragged out of his pocket a bundle of 
papers, and began to turn them over. " This is no it — this is the 
information of Mungo Marsport, of that ilk, against Captain Lack- 
land, for coming on his lands of Marsport with hawks, hounds, 
lying-dogs, nets, guns, cross-bows, hagbuts of found, or other 
engines more or less for destruction of game, sic as red-deer, fallow- 
deer, cappercailzies, grey-fowl, moor-fowl, paitricks, herons, and sic 
like ; he the said defender not being ane qualified person, in terms 
of the statute sixteen hundred and twenty-ane ; that is, not having 
ane plough-gate of land. Now, the defences proponed say, that 
non constat at this present what is a plough-gate of land, whilk 
uncertainty is sufficient to elide the conclusions of the libel. But 



lob THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

then the answers to the defenses, (they are signed by Mr. Crossmy- 
loof, but Mr. Younglad drew them,) they propone, that it signifies 
naething, in hoc statu, what or how muckle a plough-gate of land 
may be, in respect the defender has nae lands whatsoe'er, less or 
mair. ' Sae grant a plough-gate' " (here Saddletree read from the 
paper in his hand) " ' to be less than the nineteenth part of a guse's 
grass,'— (I trow Mr. Crossmyloof put in that — I ken his style,)— 'of 
a guse's grass, what the better will the defender be, seeing he hasna 
a divot-cast of land in Scotland 'i—Advocatus for Lackland duplies, 
that nihil interest de possessione, the pursuer must put his case 
under the statute ' — (now, this is worth your notice, neighbour,) — 
'and must show, formaliter et specialiter, as well as generaliterj 
what is the qualification that defender Lackland does not possess 
— let him tell me what a plough-gate of land is, and I'll tell him if 
I have one or no. Surely the pursuer is bound to understand his 
own libel, and his own statute that he founds upon. Tttius pursues 
Mmvius for recovery of ane black horse lent to Maevius — surely he 
shall have judgment ; but if Titius pursue Maevius for ane scarlet 
or crimson horse, doubtless he shall be bound to show that there is 
sic ane animal in reruin natura. No man can be bound to plead 
to nonsense — that is to say, to a charge which cannot be explained 
or understood,' — (he's wrang there — the better the pleadings the 
fewer understand them,) — ' and so the reference unto this undefined 
and unintelligible measure of land is, as if a penalty was inflicted 
by statute for any man who suld hunt or hawk, or use lying-dogs, 

and wearing a sky-blue pair of breeches, without having' 'But 

I am wearying you, Mr. Deans, we'll pass to your ain business, — 
though this case of Marsport against Lackland has made an unco 
din in the Outer-house. Weel, here's the dittay against puir Erne : 
' Whereas it is humbly meant and shewn to us,' &c. (they are words 
of mere style), ' that whereas, by the laws of this and every other 
well-regulated realm, the murder of any one, more especially of an 
infant child, is a crime of ane high nature, and severely punishable : 
And whereas, without prejudice to the foresaid generality, it was, 
by ane act made in the second session of the First Parliament of 
our most High and Dread Sovereigns William and Mary, especially 
enacted, that ane woman who shall have concealed her condition, 
and shall not be able to shew that she hath called for help at the 
birth, in case that the child shall be found dead or amissing, shall 
be deemed and held guilty of the murder thereof ; and the said 
facts of concealment and pregnancy being found proven or con- 
fessed, shall sustain the pains of law accordingly; yet, nevertheless, 
you, Erne, or Euphemia Deans' " 

" Read no farther ! " said Deans, raising his head up ; "I would 
rather ye thrust a sword into my heart than read a word farther ! " 

" Weel, neighbour," said Saddletree, " I thought it wad hae com- 
forted ye to ken the best and the warst o't. But the question is, 
what's to be dune ? " 

" Nothing," answered Deans, firmly, " but to abide the dispensa- 
tion that the Lord sees meet to send us. Oh, if it had been His 
will to take the grey head to rest before this awful visitation on my 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 107 

house and name ! But His will be done. I can say that yet, 
though I can say little mair." 

" But, neighbour," said Saddletree, " ye'll retain advocates for the 
puir lassie ? it's a thing maun needs be thought of." 

" If there was ae man of them," answered Deans, "that held fast 
his integrity — but I ken them weel, they are a' carnal, crafty, and 
warld'hunting self-seekers, Yerastians, and Arminians, every ane 
o' them." 

" Hout tout, neighbour, ye maunna tak the warld at its word," 
said Saddletree ; " the very deil is no sae ill as he's ca'd ; and I 
ken mair than ae advocate that may be said to have some integrity 
as weel as their neighbours ; that is, after a sort o' fashion o' their ain." 

" It is indeed but a fashion of integrity that ye will find amang 
them," replied David Deans, " and a fashion of wisdom, and fashion 
of carnal learning — gazing, glancing-glasses they are, fit only to 
fling the glaiks in folk's een, wi' their pawky policy, and earthly 
ingine, their flights and refinements, and periods of eloquence, frae 
heathen emperors and popish canons. They canna, in that daft 
trash ye were reading to me, sae muckle as ca' men that are sae ill- 
starred as to be amang their hands, by ony name o' the dispensation 
o' grace, but maun new baptize them by the names of the accursed 
Titus, wha was made the instrument of burning the holy Temple, 
and other sic like heathens." 

" It's Tishius," interrupted Saddletree, " and no Titus. Mr. 
Crossmyloof cares as little about Titus or the Latin as ye do. — 
But it's a case of necessity — she maun hae counsel. Now, I could 
speak to Mr. Crossmyloof — he's weel ken'd for a round-spun Pres- 
byterian, and a ruling elder to boot." 

"He's a rank Yerastian," replied Deans ; " one of the public and 
polititious warldly-wise men that stude up to prevent ane general 
owning of the cause in the day of power." 

" What say ye to the auld Laird of Cuffabout ? " said Saddletree ; 
" he whiles thumps the dust out of a case gey and weel." 

" He ? the fause loon ! " answered Deans — " he was in his banda- 
liers to hae joined the ungracious Highlanders in 1715, an they had 
ever had the luck to cross the Firth." 

" Weel, Arniston ? there's a clever chield for ye ! " said Bartoline, 
triumphantly. 

" Ay, to bring popish medals in till their very library from that 
schismatic woman in the north, the Duchess of Gordon:" 

" Weel, weel, but somebody ye maun hae — What think ye o' 
KLttlepunt ? " 

"He's an Arminian." 

" Woodsetter ? "— " He's, I doubt, a Cocceian." 

" Auld Whilliewhaw ?"— " He's onything ye like." 

" Young Nasmmo ? " — " He's naething at a'." 

" Ye're ill to please, neighbour," said Saddletree ; " I hae run 
ower the pick o' them for you, ye maun e'en choose for yoursell ; 
but bethink ye that in the multitude of counsellors' there's safety. — 
What say ye to try young Mackenyie ? he has a' his uncle's Prac- 
tiques at the tongue's end ? " 



ioB . THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" What, sir, wad ye speak to me,'' exclaimed the sturdy presby- 
terian in excessive wrath, " about a man that has the blood of the 
saints at his fingers' ends ? Dimia his erne die and gang to his 
place wi' the name of the Bluidy Mackenyie ? and winna he be 
kend by that name sae lang as there's a Scots tongue to speak the 
word ? If the life of the dear bairn that's under a suffering dispen- 
sation, and Jeanie's, and my ain, and aT mankind's, depended on 
my asking sic a slave o' Satan to speak a word for me or them, 
they should a' gae down the water thegither for Davie Deans ! " 

It was the exalted tone in which he spoke this last sentence that 
broke up the conversation between Butler and Jeanie, and brought 
them both " ben the house," to use the language of the country. 
Here they found the poor old man half frantic between grief, and 
zealous ire against Saddletree's proposed measures, his cheek in- 
flamed, his hand clenched, and his voice raised, while the tear in 
his eye, and the occasional quiver of his accents, showed that his 
utmost efforts were inadequate to shaking off the consciousness of 
his misery. Butler, apprehensive of the consequences of his agita- 
tion to an aged and feeble frame, ventured to utter to him a recom- 
mendation to patience. ' 

" I am patient," returned the old man, sternly, — " more patient 
than ony ane who is alive to the woeful backslidings of a miserable 
time can be patient ; and in so much, that I need neither sectarians, 
nor sons, nor grandsons of sectarians, to instruct my grey hairs 
how to bear my cross." 

" But, sir," continued Butler, taking no offence at the slur cast on 
his grandfather's faith, " we must use human means. When you 
call in a physician, you would not, I suppose, question him on the 
nature of his religious principles ? " 

"Wad I not" answered David — " But I wad, though ; and if he 
didna satisfy me that he had a richt sense of the richt-hand and 
left-hand defections of the day, not a goutte of his physic should 
gang through my father's son." 

It is a dangerous thing to trust to an illustration. Butler had 
done so and miscarried ; but, like a gallant soldier when his musket 
misses fire, he stood his ground, and charged with the bayonet. — 
" This is too rigid an interpretation of your duty, sir. The sun 
shines, and the rain descends, on the just and unjust, and they are 
placed together in life in circumstances which frequently render 
intercourse between them indispensable, perhaps that the evil may 
have an opportunity of being converted by the good, and perhaps, 
also, that the righteous might, among other trials, be subjected to 
that of occasional converse with the profane." 

" Ye're a silly callant, Reuben," answered Deans, " with your bits 
of argument. Can a man touch pitch and not be defiled? Or 
what think ye of the brave and worthy champions of the Covenant, 
that wadna sae muckle as hear a minister speak, be his gifts and 
graces as they would, that hadna witnessed against the enormities 
of the day ? Nae lawyer shall ever speak for me and mine that 
hasna concurred in the testimony of the scattered, yet lovely rem- 
nant, which abode in the clifts of the rocks." 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 109 

So saying, and as if fatigued, both with the arguments and pre- 
sence of his guests, the old man arose, and seeming to bid them 
adieu with a motion of his head and hand, went to shut himself up 
in his sleeping apartment. 

" It's thrawing his daughter's life awa," said Saddletree to Butler, 
" to hear him speak in that daft gate. Where will he ever get a 
Cameronian advocate ? Or wha ever heard of a lawyer's suffering 
either for ae religion or another ? The lassie's life is clean flung 
awa." 

During the latter part of this debate, Dumbiedikes had arrived 
at the door, dismounted, hung the pony's bridle on the usual hook, 
and sunk down on his ordinary settle. His eyes, with more than 
their usual animation, followed first one speaker, then another, till 
he caught the melancholy sense of the whole from Saddletree's last 
words. He rose from his seat, stumped slowly across the room, 
and, coming close up to Saddletree's ear, said, in a tremulous, 
anxious voice, " Will — will siller do naething for them, Mr. 
Saddletree?" 

" Umph ! " said Saddletree, looking grave, — " siller will cer- 
tainly do it in the Parliament House, if onything can do it ; but 
where's the siller to come frae ? Mr. Deans, ye see, will do nae- 
thing ; and though Mrs. Saddletree's their far-awa friend, and right 
good weel-wisher, and is weel disposed to assist, yet she wadna 
like to stand to be bound singuli in solidum to such an expensive 
wark. An ilka friend wad bear a share o' the burden, something 
might be dune— ilka ane to be liable for their ain input — I wadna 
like to see the case fa' through without being pled — it wadna be 
creditable, for a' that daft whig body says." 

" I'll — I will — yes," (assuming fortitude,) " I will be answerable," 
said Dumbiedikes, "for a score of punds sterling." — And he was 
silent, staring in astonishment at finding himself capable of such 
unwonted resolution and excessive generosity. 

" God Almighty bless ye, Laird ! " said Jeanie, in a transport of 
gratitude. 

" Ye may ca' the twenty punds thretty," said Dumbiedikes, look- 
ing bashfully away from her, and towards Saddletree. 

" That will do bravely," said Saddletree, rubbing his hands ; 
" and ye sail hae a' my skill and knowledge to gar the siller gang 
far — I'll tape it out weel — I ken how to gar the birkies tak short 
fees, and be glad o' them too — it's only garring them trow ye hae 
twa or three cases of importance coming on, and they'll work cheap 
to get custom. Let me alane for whillywhaing an advocate : — it's 
nae sin to get as muckle frae them for our siller as we can — after 
a', it's but the wind o* their mouth — it costs them naething ; where- 
as, in my wretched occupation of a saddler, horse-milliner, and 
harness-maker, we are out unconsionable sums just for barkened 
hides and leather." 

" Can I be of no use?" said Butler. "My means, alas ! are only 
worth the black coat I wear ; but I am young — I owe much to the 
family— Can I do nothing? " 

" Ye can help to collect evidence, sir," said Saddletree ; " if we 



no THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

could but find ony ane to say she had gien the least hint o' her con- 
dition, she wad be brought aff wi' a wat finger — Mr. Crossmyloof 
tell'd me sae. The crown, says he, canna be craved to prove a 
positive — was't a positive or a negative they couldna be ca'd to 
prove ? — it was the tane or the tither o' them, I am sure, and it 
maksna muckle matter whilk. Wherefore, says he, the libel maun 
be redargued by the panel proving her defences. And it canna be 
done otherwise." 

" But the fact, sir," argued Butler, " the fact that this poor girl 
has borne a child ; surely the crown lawyers must prove that ? " 
said Butler. 

Saddletree paused a moment, while the visage of Duiribie- 
dikes, which traversed, as if it had been placed on a pivot, from 
the one spokesman to the other, assumed a more blithe expres- 
sion. 

"Ye — ye — ye — es," said Saddletree, after some grave hesitation ; 
" unquestionably that is a thing to be proved, as the court will 
more fully declare by an interlocutor of relevancy in common 
form; but I fancy that job's done already, for she has confessed 
her guilt." 

" Confessed the murder ? " exclaimed Jeanie, with a scream that 
made them all start. 

" No, I didna say that," replied Bartoline. " But she confessed 
bearing the babe." 

" And what became 1 of it, then ? " said Jeanie, " for not a word 
could I get from her but bitter sighs and tears." 

" She says it was taken away from her by the woman in whose 
house it was born, and who assisted her at the time." 

" And who was that woman ? " said Butler. " Surely by her 
means the truth might be discovered. — Who was she ? I will fly to 
her directly." 

" I wish," said Dumbiedikes, " I were as young and as supple as 
you, and had the gift of the gab as weel." 

"Who is she?" again reiterated Butler impatiently. — "Who 
could that woman be ? " 

" Ay, wha kens that but hersell," said Saddletree ; " she deponed 
further, and declined to answer that interrogatory." 

" Then to herself will I instantly go," said Butler ; " farewell, 
Jeanie ;" — then coming close up to her — "Take no rash steps till 
you hear from me. Farewell I" and he immediately left the 
cottage. 

" 1 wad gang too," said the landed proprietor, in an anxious, 
jealous, and repining tone, " but my powny winna for the life o' me 
gang ony other road than just frae Dumbiedikes to this house-end, 
and sae straight back again." 

" Ye'U do better for them," said Saddletree, as they left the house 
together, " by sending me the thretty punds. 

" Thretty punds ! " hesitated Dumbiedikes, who was now out of 
the reach of those eyes which had inflamed his generosity ; " I only 
said twenty punds." 

"Ay ; but," said Saddletree, " that was under protestation to add 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. m 

and eik ; and so ye craved leave to amend your libel, and made it 
thretty." 

" Did I ? I dinna mind that I did," answered Dumbiedikes. 
"But whatever I said I'll stand to." Then bestriding his steed with 
some difficulty, he added, " Dinna ye think poor Jeanie's een wi' 
the tears in them glanced like lamour beads, Mr. Saddletree ? " 

. " I kenna muckle about women's een, Laird," replied the in- 
sensible Bartoline ; " and I care just as little. I wuss I were as 
weel free o' their tongues ; though few wives," he added, recollect- 
ing the necessity of keeping up his character for domestic rule, 
"are under better command than mine, Laird. I allow neither 
perduellion nor lese-majesty against my sovereign authority." 

The Laird saw nothing so important in this observation as to call 
for a rejoinder, and when they had exchanged a mute salutation, 
they parted in peace upon their different errands. 



CHAPTER XIII. 



I'll warrant that fellow from drowning, were the ship no stronger 
than a nut-shell. — The Tempest. 

Butler felt neither fatigue nor want of refreshment, although, 
from the mode in which he had spent the night, he might well have 
been overcome with either. But in the earnestness with which he 
hastened to the assistance of the sister of Jeanie Deans, he forgot 
both. 

In his first progress he walked with so rapid a pace as almost 
approached to running, when he was surprised to hear behind him 
a call upon his name, contending with an asthmatic cough, and 
half-drowned amid the resounding trot of a Highland pony. He 
looked behind, and saw the Laird of Dumbiedikes making after 
him with what speed he might, for it happened fortunately for the 
Laird's purpose of conversing with Butler, that his own road home- 
ward was for about two hundred yards the same with that which led 
by the nearest way to the city. Butler stopped when he heard him- 
self thus summoned, internally wishing no good to the panting 
equestrian who thus retarded his journey. 

Uh ! uh ! uh ! " ejaculated Dumbiedikes, as he checked the 
hobbling pace of the pony by our friend Butler. " Uh ! uh ! it's a 
hard-set willyard beast this o' mine." He had in fact just over- 
taken' the object of his chase at the very point beyond which it 
would have been absolutely impossible for him to have continued 
the pursuit, since there Butler's road parted from that leading to 
Dumbiedikes, and no means of influence or compulsion which the 
rider could possibly have used towards his Bucephalus could have 
induced the Celtic obstinacy of Rory Bean (such was the pony's 
name) to have diverged a yard from the path that conducted him 
to his own paddock. 

Even when he had recovered from the shortness of breath occa- 
sioned by a trot much more rapid than Rory or he were accustomed 



112 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

to, the high purpose of Dumbiedikes seemed to stick as it were in 
his throat, and impede his utterance, so that Butler stood for nearly 
three minutes ere he could utter a syllable ; and when he did find 
voice, it was only to say, after one or two efforts, " Uh ! uh ! uhm ! 
I say, Mr.— Mr. Butler, it's a braw day for the ha'rst." 

" Fine day, indeed," said Butler. " I wish you good-morning, 
sir." 

" Stay — stay a bit," rejoined Dumbiedikes ; " that was no what 
I had gotten to say." 

" Then, pray be quick, and let me have your commands," re- 
joined Butler ; " I crave your pardon, but I am in haste, and 
Tempus nemini — you know the proverb." 

Dumbiedikes did not know the proverb, nor did he even take the 
trouble to endeavour to look as if he did, as others in his place 
might have done. He was concentrating all his intellects for one 
grand proposition, and could not afford any detachment to defend 
outposts. " I say, Mr. Butler," said he, " ken ye if Mr. Saddle- 
tree's a great lawyer ? " 

" I have no person's word for it but his own," answered Butler, 
drily ; " but undoubtedly he best understands his own qualities." 

" Umph ! " replied the taciturn Dumbiedikes, in a tone which 
seemed to say, " Mr. Butler, I take your meaning." " In that case," 
he pursued, " I'll employ my ain man o' business, Nichil Novit 
(auld Nichil's son, and amaist as gleg as his father,) to agent 
Erne's plea." 

And having thus displayed more sagacity than Butler expected 
from him, he courteously touched his gold-laced cocked hat, and by 
a punch on the ribs, conveyed to Rory Bean, it was his rider's 
pleasure that he should forthwith proceed homewards ; a hint which 
the quadruped obeyed with that degree of alacrity with which men 
and animals interpret and obey suggestions that entirely correspond 
with their own inclinations. 

Butler resumed his pace, not without a momentary revival of that 
jealousy, which the honest Laird's attention to the family of Deans 
had at different times excited in his bosom'. But he was too generous 
long to nurse any feeling, which was allied to selfishness. " He is," 
said Butler to himself, " rich in what I want ; why should I feel 
vexed that he has the heart to dedicate some of his pelf to render 
them services, which I can only form the empty wish of executing ? 
In God's name, let us each do what we can. May she be but happy 1 
— saved from the misery and disgrace that seems impending — Let 
me but find the means of preventing the fearful experiment of this 
evening, and farewell to other thoughts, though my heart-strings 
break in parting with them ! " 

He redoubled his pace, and soon stood before the door of the 
Tolbooth, or rather before the entrance where the door had formerly 
been placed. His interview with the mysterious stranger, the mess- 
age to Jeanie, his agitating conversation with her on the subject of 
breaking off their mutual engagements, and the interesting scene 
with old Deans, had so entirely occupied his mind as to drown even 
recollection of the tragical event which he had witnessed the pre- 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 



"3 



ceding evening. His attention was not recalled to it by the groups 
who stood scattered on the street in conversation, which they hushed 
when strangers approached, or by the bustling search of the agents 
of the city police, supported by small parties of the military, or by 
the appearance of the Guard-House, before which were treble 
sentinels, or, finally, by the subdued and intimidated looks of the 
lower orders of society, who, conscious that they were liable to sus- 
picion, if they were not guilty of accession to a riot likely to be 
strictly inquired into, glided about with an humble and dismayed 
aspect, like men whose spirits being exhausted in the revel and 
the dangers of a desperate debauch over night, are nerve-shaken, 
timorous, and unenterprising on the succeeding day. 

None of these symptoms of alarm and trepidation struck Butler, 
whose mind was occupied with a different, and to him still more 
interesting subject, until he stood before the entrance to the prison, 
and saw it defended by a double file of grenadiers, instead of bolts 
and bars. Their " Stand, stand ! " the blackened appearance of 
the doorless gate-way, and the winding staircase and apartments of 
the Tolbooth, now open to the public eye, recalled the whole pro- 
ceedings of the eventful night. Upon his requesting to speak with 
Effie Deans, the same tall, thin, silver-haired turnkey, whom he had 
seen on the preceding evening, made his appearance. 

" I think," he replied to Butler's request of admission, with true 
Scottish indirectness, " ye will be the same lad that was for in to 
see her yestreen ?" 

Butler admitted he was the same person. 

" And I am thinking," pursued the turnkey, " that ye speered at 
me when we locked up, and if we locked up earlier on account of 
Porteous ? " 

" Very likely I might make some such observation," said Butler ; 
" but the question now is, can I see Effie Deans ? " 

" I dinna ken — gang in by, and up the turnpike stair, and turn 
till the ward on the left hand." 

The old man followed close behind him, with his keys in his 
hand, not forgetting even that huge one which had once opened and 
shut the outward gate of his dominions, though at present it was but 
an idle and useless burden. No sooner had Butler entered the room 
to which he was directed, than the experienced hand of the warder 
selected the proper key, and locked it on the outside. At first 
Butler conceived this manoeuvre was only an effect of the man's 
habitual and official caution and jealousy. But when he heard the 
hoarse command, " Turn out the guard ! " and immediately after- 
wards heard the clash of a sentinel's arms, as he was posted at the 
door of his apartment, he again called out to the turnkey, " My 
good friend, I have business of some consequence with Effie Deans, 
and I beg to see her as soon as possible." No answer was returned. 
" If it be against your rules to admit me,'' repeated Butler, in a still 
louder tone, " to see the prisoner, I beg you will tell me so, and let 
me go about my business. — Fugit irrevocabile tempus ! " muttered 
he to himself. 

" If ye had business to do, ye suld hae dune it before ye cam 

H 



ii 4 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

here," replied the man of keys from the outside ; "ye'll find it's 
easier wunnin in than wunnin out here— there's sma' likelihood o' 
another Porteous-mob coming to rabble us again — the law will haud 
her ain now, neighbour, and that ye'll find to your cost." 

" What do you mean by that, sir ? " retorted Butler. " You must 
mistake me for some other person. My name is Reuben Butler, 
preacher of the gospel." 

" I ken that weel eneugh," said the turnkey. 

" Well, then, if you know me, I have a right to know from you in 
return, what warrant you have for detaining me ; that, I know, is 
the right of every British subject." 

" Warrant ! " said the jailor, — " the warrant's awa to Libberton 
wi' twa sheriff officers seeking ye. If ye had staid at hame, as 
honest men should do, ye wad hae seen the warrant ; but if ye 
come to be incarcerated of your ain accord, wha can help it, 
my jo ? " 

" So I cannot see EfKe Deans, then," said Butler ; " and you are 
determined not to let me out?" 

"Troth will I no, neighbour," answered the old man, doggedly ; 
" as for Effie Deans, ye'll hae eneuch ado to mind your ain busi- 
ness, and let her mind hers ; and for letting you out, that maun be 
as the magistrate will determine. And fare ye weel for a bit, for I 
maun see Deacon Sawyers put on ane or twa o' the doors that your 
quiet folk broke down yesternight, Mr. Butler." 

There was something in this exquisitely provoking, but there was 
also something darkly alarming. To be imprisoned, even on a false 
accusation, has something in it disagreeable and menacing even to 
men of more constitutional courage than Butler had to boast ; for 
although he had much of that resolution which arises from a sense 
of duty and an honourable desire to discharge it, yet, as his imagi- 
nation was lively, and his frame of body delicate, he was far from 
possessing that cool insensibility to danger which is the happy 
portion of men of stronger health, more firm nerves, and less acute 
sensibility. An indistinct idea of peril, which he could neither 
understand nor ward off, seemed to float before his eyes. He tried 
to think over the events of the preceding night, in hopes of dis- 
covering some means of explaining or vindicating his conduct for 
appearing among the mob, since it immediately occurred to him 
that his detention must be founded on that circumstance. And it 
was with anxiety that he found he could not recollect to have been 
under the observation of any disinterested witness in the attempts 
that he made from time to time to expostulate with the rioters, and 
to prevail on them to release him. The distress of Deans's family, 
the dangerous rendezvous which Jeanie had formed, and which he 
could not now hope to interrupt, had also their share in his un- 
pleasant reflections. Yet impatient as he was to receive an eclair- 
cissemcnt upon the cause of his confinement, and if possible to 
obtain his liberty, he was affected with a trepidation which seemed 
no good omen ; when, after remaining an hour in this solitary apart- 
ment, he received a summons to attend the sitting magistrate. He 
was conducted from prison strongly guarded by a party of soldiers, 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. n S 

with a parade of precaution, that, however ill-timed and unnecessary, 
is generally displayed after an event, which such precaution, if used 
in time, might have prevented. 

He was introduced into the Council Chamber, as the place is 
called where the magistrates hold their sittings, and which was 
then at a little distance from the prison. One or two of the senators 
of the city were present, and seemed about to engage in the exami- 
nation of an individual who was brought forward to the foot of the 
long green-covered table round which the council usually assem- 
bled. "Is that the preacher ? " said one of the magistrates, as the 
city officer in attendance introduced Butler. The man answered 
in the affirmative. " Let him sit down there for an instant ; We 
will finish this man's business very briefly." 

" Shall we remove Mr. Butler ? " queried the assistant. 

" It is not necessary — Let him remain where he is." 

Butler accordingly sate down on a bench at the bottom of the 
apartment, attended by one of his keepers. 

It was a large room, partially and imperfectly lighted ; but by 
chance, or the skill of the architect, who might happen to remember 
the advantage which might occasionally be derived from such an 
arrangement, one window was so placed as to throw a strong light 
at the foot of the table at which prisoners were usually posted for 
examination, while the upper end, where the examinants sate, 
was thrown into shadow. ■ Butler's .eyes were instantly fixed on the 
person whose examination was at present proceeding, in the idea 
that he might recognise some one of the conspirators of the former 
night. But though the features of this man were sufficiently 
marked and striking, he could not recollect that he had ever seen 
them before. 

The complexion of this person was dark, and his age somewhat 
advanced. He wore his own hair, combed smooth down, and cut 
very short. It was jet black, slightly curled by nature, and already 
mottled with grey. The man's face expressed rather knavery than 
vice, and a disposition to sharpness, cunning, and. roguery, more 
than the traces of stormy and indulged passions. His sharp, quick, 
black eyes, acute features, ready sardonic smile, promptitude, and 
effrontery, gave him altogether what is called among the vulgar, a 
knowing look, which generally implies a tendency to knavery. At 
a fair or market, you could not for a moment have doubted that he 
was a horse-jockey, intimate with all the tricks of his trade ; yet 
had you met him on a moor, you would not have apprehended any 
violence from him. His dress was also that of a horse-dealer — a 
close-buttoned jockey-coat, or wrap-rascal, as it was then termed, 
with huge metal buttons, coarse blue upper stockings, called boot- 
hose, because supplying the place of boots, and a slouched hat. 
He only wanted a loaded whip under his arm and a spur upon one 
.heel, to complete the dress of the character he seemed to represent. 

" Your name is James Ratcliffe ? " said the magistrate. 

" Ay — always wi' your honour's leave." 

" That is to say, you could find me another name if I .did not 
like that one ? " 

k 2 



n6 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" Twenty to pick and choose upon, always with your honour"; 
leave ? " resumed the respondent. 

( "But James Ratcliffe is your present name? — what is your 
trade ? " 

" I canna just say, distinctly, that I have what ye wad ca' pre- 
ceesely a trade." 

" But," repeated the magistrate, "what are your means of living 
— your occupation ? " 

" Hout tout — your honour, wi' your leave, kens that as weel as I 
do," replied the examined. 

" No matter, I want to hear you describe it," said the examinant. 

" Me describe ! — and to your honour ! — far be it from Jemmie 
Ratcliffe," responded the prisoner. 

" Come, sir, no trifling — I insist on an answer." 

" Weel, sir," replied the declarant, " I maun make a clean 
breast, for ye see, wi' your leave, I am looking for favour — Describe 
my occupation, quo' ye ? — it will be ill to do that, in a feasible way, 
in a place like this — but what is't again that the aught command 
says?" 

" Thou shalt not steal," answered the magistrate. 

" Are you sure o' that ? " replied the accused. — " Troth, then, my 
occupation, and that command, are sair at odds, for I read it, thou 
shalt steal ; and that makes an unco difference, though there's but 
a wee bit word left out." 

" To cut the matter short, Ratcliffe, you have been a most noto- 
rious thief," said the examinant. 

" I believe Highlands and Lowlands ken that, sir, forby England 
and Holland," replied Ratcliffe, with the greatest composure and 
effrontery. 

" And what d'ye think the end of your calling will be ? " said the 
magistrate. 

" I could have gien a braw guess yesterday — but I dinna ken 
sae weel the day," answered the prisoner. 

" And what would you have said would have been your end had 
you been asked the question yesterday ? " 

"Just the gallows, replied Ratcliffe, with the same composure. 

" You are a daring rascal, sir," said the magistrate ; " and how 
dare you hope times are mended with you to-day ? " 

" Dear, your honour," answered Ratcliffe, " there's muckle dif- 
ference between lying in prison under sentence of death, and 
staying there of ane's ain proper accord, when it would have cost 
a man naething to get up and rin awa— what was to hinder me 
from stepping out quietly, when the rabble walked awa wi' Jock 
Porteous yestreen ? — and does you honour really think I staid on 
purpose to be hanged ?" 

" I do not know what J?ou may have proposed to yourself ; but 
I know," said the magistrate, " what the law proposes for you, and 
that is, to hang you next Wednesday eight days. 

"Na, na, your honour," said Ratcliffe firmly, "craving your 
honour's pardon, I'll ne'er believe that till I see it. I have ken'd 
the Law this mony a year, and mony a thrawart job I hae had wi' 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 117 

her first and last ; but the auld jade is no sae ill as that comes to 
— I hae fand her bark waur than her bite." 

" And if you do not expect the gallows, to which you are con- 
demned, (for the fourth time to my knowledge,) may I beg the 
favour to know," said the magistrate, " what it is that you do expect, 
in consideration of your not having taken your flight with the rest 
of the jail-birds, which I will admit was a line of conduct little to 
have been expected ? " 

" I would never have thought for a moment of staying in that 
auld gousty toom house," answered Ratcliffe, " but that use and 
wont had just gien me a fancy to the place, and I'm just expecting 
a bit post in't." 

"A post ! " exclaimed the magistrate ; " a whipping-post, I sup- 
pose you mean ? " 

" Na, na, sir, I had nae thoughts o' a whupping-post. After 
having been four times doomed to hang by the neck till I was 
dead, I think I am far beyond being whuppit." 

" Then, in Ilea's en's name, what did you expect ? " 

"Just the post of under-turnkey, for I understand there's a 
vacancy," said the prisoner ; " I wadna think of asking the lock- 
man's * place ower his head ; it wadna suit me sae weel as ither 
folk, for I never could put a beast out o' the way, much less deal 
•wi' a man." 

" That's something in your favour," said the magistrate, making 
exactly the inference to which Ratcliffe was desirous to lead him, 
though he mantled his art with an affectation of oddity. " But," 
continued the magistrate, " how do you think you can be trusted 
with a charge in the prison, when you have broken at your own 
hand half the jails in Scotland ? " 

" Wi' your honour's leave," said Ratcliffe, " if I ken'd sae weel 
how to wun out mysell, it's like I wad be a' the better a hand to 
keep other folk in. I think they wad ken their business weel that 
lield me in when I wanted to be out, or wan out when I wanted to 
haud them in." 

The remark seemed to strike the magistrate, but he made 
no farther immediate observation, only desired Ratcliffe to be 
removed. . 

When this daring and yet sly freebooter was out of hearing, the 
(magistrate asked the city-clerk, " what he thought of the fellow's 
assurance ? " 

" It's no for me to say, sir," replied the clerk ; " but if James 
Ratcliffe be inclined to turn to good, there is not a man e'er came 
within the ports of the burgh could be of sae muckle use to the 
Good Town in the thief and lock-up line of business. I'll speak to 
Mr. Sharpitlaw about him." 

Upon Ratcliffe's retreat, Butler was placed at the table for 
examination. The magistrate conducted his inquiry civilly, but 
yet in a manner which gave him to understand that he laboured 
under strong suspicion. With a frankness which at once became 
Tiis calling and character, Butler avowed his involuntary presence 
at the murder of Porteous, and, at the request of the magistrate, 



n8 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

entered into a minute detail of the circumstances which attended' 
that unhappy affair. All the particulars, such as we have nar- 
rated, were taken minutely down by the clerk from Butler's 
dictation. 

When the narrative was concluded, the cross-examination com- 
menced, which it is a painful task even for the most candid witness 
to undergo, since a story, especially if connected with agitating 
and alarming incidents, can scarce be so clearly and distinctly 
told, but that some ambiguity and doubt may be thrown upon it by 
a string of successive and minute interrogatories. 

The magistrate commenced by observing, that Butler had said 
his object was to return to the village of Libberton, but that he 
was interrupted by the mob at the West Port. " Is the West Port 
your usual way of leaving town when you go to Libberton ? " said 
the magistrate, with a sneer. 

"No, certainly," answered Butler, with the haste of a man 
anxious to vindicate the accuracy of his evidence ; " but I chanced 
to be nearer that port than any other, and the hour of shutting the 
gates was on the point of striking." 

" That was unlucky," said the magistrate, dryly. " Pray, being, 
as you say, under coercion and fear of the lawless multitude, and 
compelled to accompany them through scenes disagreeable to all 
men of humanity, and more especially irreconcilable to the pro- 
fession of a minister, did you not attempt to struggle, resist, or 
escape from their violence ? " 

Butler replied, "that their numbers prevented him from attempt- 
ing resistance, and their vigilance from effecting his escape." 

" That was unlucky," again repeated the magistrate, in the same' 
dry, inacquiescent tone of voice and manner. He proceeded with 
decency and politeness, but with a stiffness which argued his con- 
tinued suspicion, to ask many questions concerning the behaviour 
of the mob, the manners and dress of the ring-leaders ; and when 
he conceived that the caution of Butler, if he was deceiving him, 
must be lulled asleep, the magistrate suddenly and artfully returned 
to former parts of his declaration, and required a new recapitula- 
tion of the circumstances, to the minutest and most trivial point, 
which attended each part of the melancholy scene. No confusion 
or contradiction, however, occurred, that could countenance the 
suspicion which he seemed to have adopted against Butler. At 
length the train of his interrogatories reached Madge Wildfire, at 
whose name the magistrate and town clerk exchanged significant 
glances. If the fate of the Good Town had depended on her careful 
magistrate's knowing the features and dress of this persbnage, his, 
inquiries could not have been more particular. But Butler could 
say almost nothing of this person's features, which were disguised 
apparently with red paint and soot, like an Indian going to battle, 
besides the projecting shade of a curch, or coif, which muffled the 
hair of the supposed female. He declared that he thought he 
could not know this Madge Wildfire, if placed before him in a 
different dress, but that he believed he might recognise her 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. n 9 

The magistrate requested'him again to state by what gate he left 
the city. 

" By the Cowgate Port," replied Butler. 

" Was that the nearest road to Libberton ? " 

"No," answered Butler, with embarrassment; "but it was the 
nearest way to extricate myself from the mob." 

The clerk and magistrate again exchanged glances. 

" Is the Cowgate Port a nearerway to Libberton from the Grass- 
market than Bristo Port ?" 

" No," replied Butler ; " but I had to visit a friend." 

" Indeed ! " said the interrogator — " You were in a hurry to tell 
the sight you had witnessed, I suppose ?" 

" Indeed I was not," replied Butler ; " nor did I speak on the 
subject the whole time I was at Saint Leonard's Crags," 

" Which road did you take to Saint Leonard's Crags ? " 

" By the foot of Salisbury Crags," was the reply. 

" Indeed ! — you seem partial to circuitous routes," again said the 
magistrate. " Whom did you see after you left the city ?" 

One by one he obtained a description of every one of the groups 
who had passed Butler, as already noticed, their number, de- 
meanour, and appearance ; and, at length, came to the circum- 
stance of the mysterious stranger in the King's Park. On this 
subject Butler would fain have remained silent. But the magistrate 
had no sooner got a slight hint concerning the incident, than he 
seemed bent to possess himself of the most minute particulars. 

" Look ye, Mr. Butler," said he, " you are a young man, and bear 
an excellent character ; so much I will myself testify in your favour. 
But we are aware there has been, at times, a sort of bastard and 
fiery zeal in some of your order, and those, men irreproachable in 
other points, which has led them into doing and countenancing 
great irregularities, by which the peace of the country is liable to 
be shaken. — I will deal plainly with you. I am not at all satisfied 
with this story, of your setting out again and again to seek your 
dwelling by two several roads, which were both circuitous. And, 
to be frank, no one whom we have examined on this unhappy affair 
could trace in your appearance any thing like your acting under 
compulsion. Moreover, the waiters at the Cowgate Port observed 
something like the trepidation of guilt in your conduct, and declare 
that you were the first to command them to open the gate, in a tone 
of authority, as if still presiding over the guards and outposts of 
the rabble, who had besieged them the whole night." 

" God forgive them ! " said Butler ; " I only asked free passage 
,for myself; they must have much misunderstood, if they did not 
wilfully misrepresent me." 

" Well, Mr. Butler," resumed the magistrate, " I am inclined to 
judge the best and hope the best, as I am sure I wish the best ; 
but you must be frank with me, if you wish to secure my good 
opinion, and lessen the risk of inconvenience to yourself. You have 
allowed you saw another individual in your passage through the 
King's Park to Saint Leonard's Crags — I must know every word 
which passed betwixt you." 



120 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

Thus closely pressed, Butler, who had no reason for concealing 
what passed at that meeting, unless because Jeanie Deans was con- 
cerned in it, thought it best to tell the whole truth from beginning 
to end. 

"Do you suppose," said the magistrate, pausing, "that the young 
woman will accept an invitation so mysterious ?" 

" I fear she will," replied Butler. . 

"Why do you use the word/ear it?" said the magistrate. 

" Because I am apprehensive for her safety, in meeting, at such 
a time and place, one who had something of the manner of a 
desperado, and whose message was of a character so inexplicable." 

" Her safety shall be cared for," said the magistrate. " Mr. 
Butler, I am concerned I cannot immediately discharge you from 
confinement, but I hope you will not be long detained.— Remove 
Mr. Butler, and let him be provided with decent accommodation in 
all respects." 

He was conducted back to the prison accordingly ; but, in the food 
offered to him, as well as in the apartment in which he was lodged, 
the recommendation of the magistrate was strictly attended to. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

Dark and eerie was the night, 

And lonely was the way, 
As Janet, wi' her green mantell, 

To Miles' Cross she did gae. 

Old Ballad. 

Leaving Butler to all the uncomfortable thoughts attached to 
his new situation, among which the most predominant was his 
feeling that he was, by his confinement, deprived of all possibility 
of assisting the family at Saint Leonard's in their greatest need, 
we return to Jeanie Deans, who had seen him depart, without an 
opportunity of farther explanation, in all that agony of mind with 
which the female heart bids adieu to the complicated sensations so 
well described by Coleridge, — 

Hopes, and fears that kindle hope, 

An undistinguishable throng ; 
And gentle wishes long subdued — 

Subdued and cherish'd long. 

It is not the firmest heart (and Jeanie, under her russet rokelay, 
had one that would not have disgraced Cato's daughter) that can 
most easily bid adieu to these soft and mingled emotions. She 
wept for a few minutes bitterly, and without attempting to refrain 
from this indulgence of passion. But a moment's recollection 
induced her to check herself for a grief selfish and proper to her 
own affections, while her father and sister were plunged into such 
deep and irretrievable affliction. She drew from her pocket the 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. lai 

letter which had been that morning flung into her apartment, 
through an open window, and the contents of which were as sin- 
gular as the expression was violent and energetic. " If she would 
save a human being from the most damning guilt, and all its 
desperate consequences, — if she desired the life and honour of her 
sister to be saved from the bloody fangs of an unjust law, — if she 
desired not to forfeit peace of mind here, and happiness hereafter," 
such was the frantic style of the conjuration, " she was entreated to 
give a sure, secret, and solitary meeting to the writer. She alone 
could rescue him," so ran the letter, "and he only could rescue her." 
He was in such circumstances, the billet farther informed her, that 
an attempt to bring any witness of their conference, or even to 
mention to her father, or any other person whatsoever, the letter 
which requested it, would inevitably prevent its taking place, and 
ensure the destruction of her sister. The letter concluded with 
incoherent but violent protestations, that in obeying this summons 
she had nothing to fear personally. 

The message delivered to her by Butler from the stranger in the 
Park tallied exactly with the contents of the letter, but assigned a 
later hour and a different place of meeting. Apparently the writer 
of the letter had been compelled to let Butler so far into his con- 
fidence, for the sake of announcing this change to Jeanie. She 
was more than once on the point of producing the billet, in vindi- 
cation of herself from her lover's half-hinted suspicions. But there 
is something in stooping to justification which the pride of inno- 
cence does not at all times willingly submit to ; besides that, the 
threats contained in the letter, in case of her betraying the secret, 
hung heavy on her heart. It is probable, however, that had they 
remained longer together, she might have taken the resolution to 
submit the whole matter to Butler, and be guided by him as to the 
line of conduct which she should adopt. And when, by the sudden 
interruption of their conference, she lost the opportunity of doing 
so, she felt as if she had been unjust to a friend whose advice might 
have been highly useful, and whose attachment deserved her full 
and unreserved confidence. 

To have recourse to her father upon this occasion, she considered 
as highly imprudent. There was no possibility of conjecturing in 
what light the matter might strike old David, whose manner of 
acting and thinking in extraordinary circumstances depended 
upon feelings and principles peculiar to himself, the operation of 
which could not be calculated upon even by those best acquainted 
with him. To have requested some female friend to have accom- 
panied her to the place of rendezvous, would perhaps have been 
the most eligible expedient ; but the threats of the writer, that 
betraying his secret would prevent their meeting (on which her 
sister's safety was said to depend) from taking place at all, would 
have deterred her from making such a confidence, even had she 
known a person in whom she thought it could with safety have 
been reposed. But she knew none such. Their' acquaintance 
with the cottagers in the vicinity had been very slight, and limited 
to trifling acts of good neighbourhood. Jeanie knew little of them, 



122 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

and what she knew did not greatly incline her to trust any of them. 
They were of the order of loquacious good-humoured gossips 
usually found in their situation of life ; and their conversation had 
at all times few charms for a young woman, to whom nature and 
the circumstance of a solitary life had given a depth of thought 
and force of character superior to the frivolous part of her sex, 
whether in high or low degree. 

Left alone and separated from all earthly counsel, she had re- 
course to a friend and adviser, whose ear is open to the cry of the 
poorest and most afflicted of his people. She knelt, and prayed 
with fervent sincerity, that God would please to direct her what 
Course to follow in her arduous and distressing situation. It was 
the belief of the time and sect to which she belonged, that special 
answers to prayer, differing little in their character from divine 
inspiration, were, as they expressed it, " borne in upon their minds " 
in answer to their earnest petitions in a crisis of difficulty. Without 
entering into an abstruse point of divinity, one thing is plain ; 
namely, that the person who lays open his doubts and distresses in 
prayer, with feeling and sincerity, must necessarily, in the act of 
doing so, purify his mind from the dross of worldly passions and 
interests, and bring it into that state, when the resolutions adopted 
are likely to be selected rather from a sense of duty, than from 
any inferior motive. Jeanie arose from her devotions, with her 
heart fortified to endure affliction, and encouraged t'o face 
difficulties. 

" I will meet this unhappy man," she said to herself—" unhappy 
he must be, since I doubt he has been the cause of poor Effie's- 
misfortune — but I will meet him, be it for good or ill. My mind 
shall never cast up to me, that, for fear of what might be said or 
done to myself, I left that undone that might even yet be the 
rescue of her." 

With a mind greatly composed since the adoption of this reso- 
lution, she went to attend her father. The old man, firm in the 
principles of his youth, did not, in outward " appearance at least, 
permit a thought of his family distress to interfere with the stoical 
reserve of his countenance and manners. He even chid his 
daughter for having neglected, in the distress of the morning, some 
trifling domestic duties which fell under her department. 

" Why, what meaneth this, Jeanie ? " said the old man — " The 
brown four-year-auld's milk is not seiled yet, nor the bowies put 
up on the bink. If ye neglect your warldly duties in the day of 
affliction, what confidence have I that ye mind the greater matters 
that concern salvation ? God knows, our bowies, and our pipkins, 
and our draps o' milk, and our bits o' bread, are nearer and dearer 
to us than the bread of life." 

Jeanie, not unpleased to hear her father's thoughts thus expand 
themselves beyond the sphere of his -immediate distress, obeyed 
him, and proceeded to put her household matters in order ; while 
old David moved from place to place about his ordinary employ- 
ments, scarce showing, unless by a nervous impatience at remain- 
ing long stationary, an occasional convulsive sigh, or twinkle of 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 123 

the eyelid, that he was labouring under the yoke of such bitter 
affliction. 

The hour of noon came on, and the father and child sat down to 
their homely repast. In his petition for a blessing on the meal, 
the poor old man added to his supplication, a prayer that the bread 
eaten in sadness of heart, and the bitter waters of Marah, might 
be made as nourishing as those which had been poured forth from 
a full cup and a plentiful basket and store ; and having concluded 
his benediction, and resumed the bonnet which he had laid " reve- 
rently aside," he proceeded to exhort his daughter to eat, not by 
example indeed, but at least by precept. 

"The man after God's own heart," he said, "washed and 
anointed himself, and did eat bread, in order to express his sub- 
mission under a dispensation of suffering, and it did not become a 
Christian man or woman so to cling to creature comforts of wife or 
bairns," (here the words became too great, as it were, for his 
utterance,) — " as to forget the first duty, — submission to the 
Divine will." 

To add force to his precept, he took a morsel on his plate, but 
nature proved too strong even for the powerful feelings with which . 
he endeavoured to bridle it. Ashamed of his weakness, he started 
up, and ran out of the house, with haste very unlike the delibera- 
tion of his usual movements. In less than five minutes he returned, 
having successfully struggled to recover his ordinary composure of 
mind and countenance, and affected to colour over his late retreat, 
by muttering that he thought he heard the " young staig loose in 
the byre." 

He did not again trust himself with the subject of his former 
conversation, and his daughter was glad to see that he seemed to 
avoid farther discourse on that agitating topic. The hours glided 
on, as on they must and do pass, whether winged with joy or laden 
with affliction. The sun set beyond the dusky eminence of the 
Castle, and the screen of western hills, and the close of evening 
summoned David Deans and his daughter to the family duty .of 
the night. It came bitterly upon Jeanie's recollection, how often, 
when the hour of worship approached, she used to watch the 
lengthening shadows, and look out from the door of the house, to 
see if she could spy her sister's return homeward. Alas ! this idle 
and thoughtless waste of time, to what evils had it not finally led? 
and was she altogether guiltless, who, noticing Effie's turn to idle 
and light society, had not called in her father's authority to lestrain 
her ? — But I acted for the best, she again reflected, and who could 
have expected such a growth of evil from one grain of leaven, in a 
disposition so kind, and candid, and generous ? 

As they sate down to the " exercise," as it is called, a chair hap- 
pened accidentally to stand in the place which Effie usually 
occupied. David Deans saw his daughter's eyes swim in tears as 
they were directed towards this object, and pushed it aside, with a 
gesture of some impatience, as if desirous to destroy every memo- 
rial of earthly interest when about to address the Deity. The 
portion pf Scripture was read, the psalm was sung, the prayer was 



za 4 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

made ; and it was remarkable that, in discharging these duties, the 
old man avoided all passages and expressions, of which Scripture 
affords so many, that might be considered as applicable to his own 
domestic misfortune. In doing so it was perhaps his intention to 
spare the feelings of his daughter, as well as to maintain, in out- 
ward show at least, that stoical appearance of patient endurance 
of all the evil which earth could bring, which was, in his opinion, 
essential to the character of one who rated all earthly things at 
their own just estimate of nothingness. When he had finished the 
duty of the evening, he came up to his daughter, wished her good 
night, and, having done so, continued to hold her by the hands for 
half a minute ; then drawing her towards him, kissed her forehead, 
and ejaculated, " The God of Israel bless you, even with the bless- 
ings of the promise, my dear bairn ! " 

It was not either in the nature or habits of David Deans to seem 
a fond father ; nor was he often observed to experience, or at least 
to evince, that fulness of the heart which seeks to expand itself in 
tender expressions or caresses even to those who were dearest to 
him. On the contrary, he used to censure this as a degree of 
weakness in several of his neighbours, and particularly in poor 
widow Butler. It followed, however, from the rarity of such emo- 
tions in this self-denied v and reserved man, that his children 
attached to occasional marks of his affection and approbation a 
degree of high interest and solemnity ; well considering them as 
evidences of feelings which were only expressed when they became 
too intense for suppression or concealment. 

With deep emotion, therefore, did he bestow, and his daughter 
receive, this benediction and paternal caress. "And you, my dear 
father," exclaimed Jeanie, when the door had closed upon the 
venerable old man, " may you have purchased and promised bless- 
ings multiplied upon you — upon you, who walk in this world as 
though you were not of the world, and hold all that it can give 
or take away but as the midges that the sun-blink brings out, 
and the evening wind sweeps away ! " 

She now made preparation for her night walk. Her father slept 
in another part of the dwelling, and, regular in all his habits, 
seldom or never left his apartment when he had betaken himself 
to it for the evening. It was therefore easy for her to leave the 
aouse unobserved, so soon as the time approached at which she 
was to keep her appointment. But the step she was about to take 
had difficulties and terrors in her own eyes, though she had no . 
reason to apprehend her father's interference. Her life had been 
spent in the quiet, uniform, and regular seclusion of their peaceful 
and monotonous household. The very hour which some damsels 
of the present day, as well of her own as of higher degree, would 
consider as the natural period of commencing an evening of 
pleasure, brought, in her opinion, awe and solemnity in it ; and 
the resolution she had taken had a strange, daring, and adven- 
turous character, to which she could hardly reconcile herseif when 
the moment approached for putting it into execution. Her hands 
trembled as she snooded her fair hair beneath the riband, then 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 



MS 



the only ornament or cover which young unmarried women wore on 
their head, and as she adjusted the scarlet tartan screen or muffler 
made of plaid, which the Scottish women wore, much in the 
fashion of the black silk veils still a part of female dress in the 
Netherlands. A sense of impropriety as well as of danger pressed 
upon her, as she lifted the latch of her paternal mansion to leave it 
on so wild an expedition, and at so late an hour, unprotected, and 
without the knowledge of her natural guardian. 

When she found herself abroad and in the open fields, addi- 
tional subjects of apprehension crowded upon her. The dim cliffs 
and scattered rocks, interspersed with green sward, through which 
she had to pass to the place of appointment, as they glimmered 
before her in a clear autumn night, recalled to her memory many a 
deed of violence, which, according to tradition, had been done and 
suffered among them. In earlier days they had been the haunt of 
robbers and assassins, the memory of whose crimes are preserved 
in the various edicts which the council of the city, and even the 
Farliament of Scotland, had passed for dispersing their bands, 
and ensuring safety to the lieges, so near the precincts of the city. 
The names of these criminals, and of their atrocities, were still 
remembered in traditions of the scattered cottages and the neigh- 
bouring suburb. In latter times, as we have already noticed, the 
sequestered and broken character of the ground rendered it a fit 
theatre for duels and rencontres among the fiery youth of the 
period. Two or three of these incidents, all sanguinary, and one of 
them fatal in its termination, had happened since Deans came to 
live at Saint Leonard's. His daughter's recollections, therefore, 
were of blood and horror as she pursued the small scarce -tracked 
solitary path, every step of which conveyed her to a greater dis- 
tance from help, and deeper into the ominous seclusion of these 
unhallowed precincts. 

As the moon began to peer forth on the scene with a doubtful, 
flitting, and solemn light, Jeanie's apprehensions took another 
turn, too peculiar to her rank and country to remain unnoticed. 
But to trace its origin will require another chapter. 



CHAPTER XV. 



The spirit I have seen 

May be the devil. And the devil has power 

To assume a pleasing shape. Hamlet. 

Witchcraft and demonology, as we have had already occa- 
sion to remark, were at this period believed in by almost all ranks, 
but more especially among the stricter classes of presbyterians, 
whose government, when their party were at the head of the state, 
had been much sullied by their eagerness to inquire into, and 
persecute these imaginary crimes. Now, in this point of view, 
also, St. Leonard's Crags, and the adjacent Chase were a dreaded 



126 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

and ill-reputed district. Not only had witches held their meetings 
there, but even of very late years the enthusiast, or impostor, 
mentioned in the Pandsemonium of Richard Bovet, Gentleman,* 
had, among the recesses of these romantic cliffs, found his way 
into the hidden retreats where the fairies revel in the bowels of the 
earth. 

With all these legends Jeanie Deans was too well acquainted, to 
escape that strong impression which they usually make on the 
imagination. Indeed, relations of this ghostly kind had been 
familiar to her from her infancy, for they were the only relief which 
her father's conversation afforded from controversial argument, or 
the gloomy history of the strivings and testimonies, escapes, cap- 
tures, tortures, and executions of those martyrs of the Covenant, 
with whom it was his chiefest boast to say he had been acquainted. 
In the recesses of mountains, in caverns, and in morasses, to which 
these persecuted enthusiasts were so ruthlessly pursued, they con- 
ceived they had often to contend with the visible assaults of the 
Enemy of mankind, as in the cities, and in the cultivated fields, 
they were exposed to those of the tyrannical government and their 
soldiery. Such were the terrors which made one of their gifted 
seers exclaim, when his companion returned to him, after having 
left him alone in a haunted cavern in Sorn in Galloway, " It is 
hard living in this world — incarnate devils above the earth, and 
devils under the earth ! Satan has been here since ye went away, 
but I have dismissed him by resistance ; we will be no more 
troubled with him this night." David Deans believed this, and 
many other such ghostly encounters and victories, on the faith of the 
Ansars, or auxiliaries of the banished prophets. This event was 
beyond David's remembrance. But he used to tell with great awe, 
yet not without a feeling of proud superiority to his auditors, how 
he himself had been present at a field-meeting at Crochmade, 
when the duty of the day was interrupted by the apparition of a 
tall black man, who, in the act of crossing a ford to join the con- 
gregation, lost ground, and was carried down apparently by the 
force of the stream. AH were instantly at work to assist him, but 
with so little success, that ten or twelve stout men, who had hold 
of the rope, which they had cast in to his aid, were rather in 
danger to be dragged into the stream, and lose their own lives, 
than likely to save that of the supposed perishing man. " But 
famous John Semple of Carsphaim, David Deans used to say with 
exultation, " saw the whaup in the rape. — ' Quit the rope,' he cried 
to us (for I that was but a callant had a haud o' the rape mysell,) 
' it is the Great Enemy ! he will burn, but not drown ; his design 
is to disturb the good wark, by raising wonder and confusion in 
your minds ; to put off from your spirits all that ye hae heard and 
felt.' — Sae we let go the rape," said David, " and he went adown 
the water screeching and bullering like a Bull of Bashan, as he's 
ca'd in Scripture." * 

Trained in these and similar legends, it was no wonder that 
Jeanie began to feel an ill-defined apprehension, not merely of the 
phantoms which might beset her way, but of the quality, nature, 



» 

> 




THE, HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 127 

and purpose of the being who had thus appointed her a meeting, 
at a place and hour of horror, and at a time when her mind must 
be necessarily full of those tempting and ensnaring thoughts of 
grief and despair, which were supposed to lay sufferers particularly 
open to the temptations of the Evil One. If such an idea had 
crossed even Butler's well-informed mind, it was calculated to 
make a much stronger impression upon hers. Yet firmly believing 
the possibility of an encounter so terrible to flesh and blood, 
Jeanie, with a degree of resolution of which we cannot sufficiently 
estimate the merit, because the incredulity of the age has rendered 
us strangers to the nature and extent of her feelings, persevered in 
her determination not to omit an opportunity of doing something 
towards saving her sister, although, in the attempt to avail herself 
of it, she might be exposed to dangers so dreadful to her imagina- 
tion. So, like Christiana, in the Pilgrim's Progress, when traversing 
with a timid yet resolved step the terrors of the Valley of the 
Shadow of Death, she glided on by rock and stone, "now in 
glimmer and now in gloom," as her path lay through moonlight or 
shadow, and endeavoured to overpower the suggestions of fear, 
sometimes by fixing her mind upon the distressed condition of her 
sister, and the duty she lay under to afford her aid, should that be 
in her power ; and more frequently by recurring in mental prayer 
to the protection of that Being to whom night is as noon-day. 

Thus drowning at one time her fears by fixing her mind on a 
subject of overpowering interest,! and arguing them down at others 
by referring herself to the protection of the Deity, she at length 
approached the place assigned for this mysterious conference. 

It was situated in the depth of the valley behind Salisbury Crags, 
which has for a background the north-western shoulder of the 
mountain called Arthur's Seat, on whose descent still remain the 
ruins of what was once a chapel, or hermitage, dedicated to St. 
Anthony the Eremite. A better site for such a building could 
hardly have been selected ; for the chapel, situated among the rude 
and pathless cliffs, lies in a desert, even in the immediate vicinity 
of a rich, populous, and tumultuous capital ; and the hum of the 
city might mingle with the orisons of the recluses, conveying as 
little of worldly interest as if it had been the roar of the distant 
ocean. Beneath the steep ascent on which these ruins are still 
visible, was, and perhaps is still pointed out, the place where 
the wretch Nichol Muschat, who has been already mentioned in 
these pages, had closed a long scene of cruelty towards his unfor- 
tunate wife, by murdering her, with circumstances of uncommon 
barbarity.* The execration in which the man's crime was held 
extended itself to the place where it was perpetrated, which was 
marked by a small cairn, or heap of stones, composed of those 
which each chance passenger had thrown there in testimony of 
abhorrence, and on the principle, it would seem, of the ancient 
British malediction, "May you have a cairn for your burial place !" 

As our heroine approached this ominous and unhallowed spot, 
she paused and looked to the moon, now rising broad in the north- 
west, and shedding a more distinct light than it had afforded during 



128 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

her walk thither. Eyeing the planet for a moment, she then slowly 
and fearfully turned her head towards the cairn, from which it was 
at first averted. She was at first disappointed. Nothing was visible 
beside the little pile of stones, which shone grey in the moonlight. 
A multitude of confused suggestions rushed on her mind. Had her 
correspondent deceived her, and broken his appointment ? — was he 
too tardy at the appointment he had made ?— or had some strange 
turn of fate prevented him from appearing as he proposed?— or, if 
he were an unearthly being, as her secret apprehensions suggested, 
was it his object merely to delude her with false hopes, and put her 
to unnecessary toil and terror, according to the nature, as she had 
heard, of those wandering demons ? — or did he purpose to blast 
her with the sudden horrors of his presence when she had come 
close to the place of rendezvous ? These anxious reflections did not 
prevent her approaching to the cairn with a pace that, though slow, 
was determined. 

When she was within two yards of the heap of stones, a figure 
rose suddenly up from behind it, and Jeanie scarce forbore to 
scream aloud at what seemed the realization of the most frightful 
of her anticipations. She constrained herself to silence, however, 
and, making a dead pause, suffered the figure to open the conver- 
sation, which he did, by asking, in a voice which agitation rendered 
tremulous and hollow, " Are you the sister of that ill-fated young 
woman ? " 

" I am — I am the sister of Effie Deans ! " exclaimed Jeanie. 
" And as ever you hope God will hear you at your need, tell me, if 
you can tell, what can be done to save her ! " 

" I do not hope God will hear me at my need," was the singular 
answer. " I do not deserve — I do not expect he will." This despe- 
rate language he uttered in a tone calmer than that with which he 
had at first spoken, probably because the shock qf first addressing 
her was what he felt most difficult to overcome. Jeanie remained 
mute with horror to hear language expressed so utterly foreign to 
all which she had ever been acquainted with, that it sounded in her 
ears rather like that of a fiend than of a human being. The stranger 
pursued his address to her, without seeming to notice her surprise. 
" You see before you a wretch, predestined to evil here and here- 
after." 

" For the sake of Heaven, that hears and sees us," said Jeanie, 
" dinna speak in this desperate fashion ! The gospel is sent to the 
chief of sinners — to the most miserable among the miserable." 

" Then should I have my own share therein," said the stranger, 
" if you call it sinful to have been the destruction of the mother that 
bore me— of the friend that loved me— of the woman that trusted 
me — of the innocent child that was born to me. If to have done 
all this is to be a sinner, and survive it is to be miserable, then am 
I most guilty and most miserable indeed." 

" Then you are the wicked cause of my sister's ruin ? " said Jeanie, 
with a natural touch of indignation expressed in her tone of voice. 

" Curse me for it, if you will," said the stranger ; " I have well 
deserved it at your hand." 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 129 

" It is fitter for me," said Jeanie, " to pray to God to forgive you." 

" Do as you will, how you will, or what you will," he replied, with 
vehemence ; " only promise to obey my directions, and save your 
sister's life." 

" I must first know," said Jeanie, "the means you would have me 
use in her behalf." 

" No ! — you must first swear — solemnly swear, that you will em- 
ploy them when I make them known to you." 

" Surely, it is needless to swear that I will do all that is lawful to 
a Christian, to save the life of my sister ? " 

" I will have no reservation ! " thundered the stranger ; " lawful 
or unlawful, Christian or heathen, you shall swear to do my hest, 
and act by my counsel, or — you little know whose wrath you pro- 
voke!" 

" I will think on what you have said,"said jeanie, who began to 
get much alarmed at the frantic vehemence of his manner, and 
disputed in her own mind, whether she spoke to a maniac, or an 
apostate spirit incarnate — " I will think on what you say, and let you 
ken to-morrow." 

" To-morrow ! " exclaimed the man with a laugh of scorn — " And 
where will I be to-morrow? — or, where will you be to-night, unless 
you swear to walk by my counsel ? — There was one accursed deed 
done at this spot before now ; and there shall be another to match 
it, unless you yield up to my guidance body and soul." 

As he spoke, he offered a pistol at the unfortunate young woman. 
She neither fled nor fainted, but sunk on her knees, and asked him 
to spare her life. 

"Is that all you have to say ? " said the unmoved ruffian. 

" Do not dip your hands in the blood of a defenceless creature 
that has trusted to you," said Jeanie, still on her knees. 

" Is that all you can say for your life? — Have you no promise to 
give ! — Will you destroy your sister, and compel me to shed more 
blood?" 

" I can promise nothing," said Jeanie, " which is unlawful for a 
Christian." 

He cocked the weapon, and held it towards her. 

" May God forgive you ! " she said, pressing her hands forcibly 
against her eyes. 

" D n ! " muttered the man ; and, turning aside from her, he 

uncocked the pistol, and replaced it in his pocket — " I am a 
villain," he said, " steeped in guilt and wretchedness, but not wicked 
enough to do you any harm ! I only wished to terrify you into my 
measures — She hears me not — she is gone ! — Great God ! what a 
wretch am I become ! " 

As he spoke, she recovered herself from an agony which partook 
of the bitterness of death ; and, in a minute or two, through the 
strong exertion of her natural sense and courage, collected herself 
sufficiently to understand he intended her no personal injury. 

" No ! " he repeated ; " I would not add to the murder of your 
sister, and of her child, that of any one belonging to her !— Mad, 
frantic, as I am, and unrestrained by either fear or mercy, given up 



130 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

to the possession of an evil being; and forsaken by all thatis good, 
I would not hurt you, were the world offered me for a bribe ! But, 
for the sake of all that is dear to you, swear you will, follow my 
counsel. Take this weapon, shoot me through the heady and with 
your own hand revenge your sister's wrong, only follow the course 
— the only course, by which her life can be saved." 

" Alas ! is she innocent or guilty ? " 

" She is guiltless — guiltless of everything, but of having trusted 
a villain !— Yet, had it' not been for those that were worse than I 
am — yes, worse than I am, though I am bad indeed — this misery 
had not befallen." 

"And my sister's child— does it live?" said Jeanie. 

" No ; it was murdered — the new-born infant was barbarously 
murdered," he uttered in a low, yet stern and sustained voice ; — 
"but," he added hastily* "not by her knowledge or consentl" 

" Then, why cannot the guilty be brought to justice, and the inno- 
cent freed ? " 

" Torment me not with questions which can serve no purpose," he 
sternly replied — "The deed was done by those who are far enough 
from pursuit, and safe enough from discovery ! — No one can: save 
Effie but yourself." 

"Wo '9 me ! how is it in my power?" asked Jeanie, in despon- 
dency. 

" Hearken to me ! — You have sense — you can apprehend ray 
meariing-^I will trust you. Your sister is innocent' of the crime 
charged against her " 

" Thank God for that ! " said Jeanie, 

" Be still and hearken ! — The person who assisted her in her ill- 
ness murdered the child ; but it was without the mother'sknowledge 
or consent. — She is therefore guiltless, as guiltless as the unhappy 
innocent, that but gasped a few minutes in this unhappy would-*— the 
better was its hap to be so soon at rest. She is innocent as that in- . 
fant, and yet she must die — it is impossible to clear her of the. law ! " 

" Cannot the wretches be discovered,, and given up to punish- 
ment?" said Jeanie. 

"Do you think you will persuade those who are hardened in guilt 
to die to save another ! — Is that the reed you would lean to ?" 

" But you said there was a remedy," again gasped out the terrified 
young woman. 

"There is," answered the stranger, " and it is in your own hands. 
The blow which the law aims cannot be broken by directly en- 
countering it, but it may be turned aside. You saw your sister 
during the period preceding the birth of her child — what is so 
natural as that she should have mentioned her condition to you.? 
The doing so would, as the cant goes, take the case from under the 
statute, fon it removes the quality of concealment. I know their 
jargon, and have had sad cause "to know it ; and the quality of con- 
cealment is essential to this statutory offence.* Nothing is so 
natural as that, Effie should have mentioned her condition to you — 
think — reflect— I am positive that she did." 

" Wo 's me ! " said Jeannie, " she never spoke to me on the sub^ 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 131 

jecti but grat sorely when I spoke to her about her altered looks, 
and the change on her spirits." 

"You asked her questions on the subject?" he said eagerly. 
" You must remember her answer was a confession that she had 
been ruined by a villain — yes, lay a strong emphasis on that — a 
eruel false villain call it — any other name is unnecessary ; and that 
she bore under her bosom the consequences of his guilt and her 
folly ; and that he had assured her he would provide safely for her 
approaching illness. — Well he kept his word ! " These last words 
he spoke as it were to himself, and with a violent gesture of self- 
accusation, and then calmly proceeded, " You will remember all 
this ? — That is all that is necessary to be said." 

"But I cannot remember," answered J eanie, with simplicity^ "that 
which Effie never told me." 

"Are you so dull — so very dull of apprehension ? " he exclaimed, 
suddenly grasping her arm, and holding it firm in his hand. " I tell 
you," (speaking between his teeth, and under his breath, but- with 
great energy,) "you must remember that she told you all this, 
whether she ever said a- syllable of it or no. You must repeat 1 this 
tale, in which there is no falsehood, except in so far as it was not 
told to you, before these Justices — Justiciary — whatever they call 
their bloodthirsty court, and save your sister from being murdered, 
and them from becoming murderers. Do not hesitate — I pledge 
life and salvation, that in saying what I have said, you will only 
speak the simple .truth." 

" But," replied Jeanie, whose judgment was too accurate not to 
, see the sophistry of this argument, " I shall be man-sworn in the 
very thing in which my testimony is wanted, for it is the conceals 
ment for which poor Effie is blamed, and you would make me tell 
a falsehood anent it." 

" I see," he said, " my first suspicions of you were right, and that 
you will let your sister, innocent, fair, and guiltless, except intrusting 
a villain, die the death of amurderess, rather than bestow the breath 
of your mouth and the sound of your voice to save her." 

" I wad ware the best blood in my body to keep her skaithless,'' 
said Jeanie, weeping in bitter agony, "but I canna change right into 
wrang, or make that true that is false." 

" Foolish, hard-hearted girl," said the stranger, " are you afraid 
of what they may do to you ? I tell you, even the retainers of the 
law,, who course life as grey-hounds do hares, will rejoice at the 
escape of a creature so young — so beautiful ; that they will not susr 
pect your tale ; that, if they did suspect it, they would consider you 
as deserving, not only of forgiveness, but of praise for your natural 
affection." 

" It is not man I fear," said Jeanie, looking upward ; " the God, 
whose name I must call on to witness the truth of what I say, he 
will know the falsehood." 

" And he will know the motive,'' said the stranger, eagerly ; " he 
will know that you are doing this — not for lucre of gain, but to save 
the life of the innocent, and prevent the commission of a worse 
crime than that which the law seeks to avenge." 

-- 2 



13a THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" He has given us a law," said Jeanie, " for the lamp of our path J 
if we stray from it we err against knowledge — I may not do evil, 
even that good may come out of it. But you — you that ken all this 
to be true, which I must take on your word, — you that, if I under- 
stood what you said e'en now, promised her shelter and protection 
in her travail, why do not you step forward, and bear leal and 
soothfast evidence in her behalf, as ye may with a clear conscience?" 

" To whom do you talk of a clear conscience, woman ? " said he, 
with a sudden fierceness which renewed her terrors, — " to me ? — 
I have not known one for many a year. Bear witness in her behalf? 
— a proper witness, that, even to speak these few words to a woman 
of so little consequence as yourself, must choose such an hour and 
such a place as this. When you see owls and bats fly abroad, like 
larks, in the sunshine, you may expect to see such as I am in the 
assemblies of men. — Hush— listen to that." 

A voice was heard to sing one of those wild and monotonous 
strains so common in Scotland, and to which the natives of that 
country chant their old ballads. The sound ceased — then came 
nearer, and was renewed ; the stranger listened attentively, still 
holding Jeanie by the arm, (as she stood by him in motionless 
terror,) as if to prevent her interrupting the strain by speaking or 
stirring. When the sounds were renewed, the words were distinctly 
audible : 

" When the gled's in the blue cloud, 
The lavrock lies still ; 
When the hound's in the green-wood, 
The hind keeps the hill." 

The person who sung kept a strained and powerful voice at its 
highest pitch, so that it could be heard at a very considerable dis- 
tance. As the song ceased, they might hear a stifled sound, as of 
steps and whispers of persons approaching them. The song was 
again raised, but the tune was changed : 

" O sleep ye sound, Sir James, she said, 
When ye suld rise and ride ? 
There's twenty men, wi' bow and blade, 
Are seeking where ye hide." 

" I dare stay no longer," said the stranger ; " return home, or re- 
main till they come up— you have nothing to fear— but do not tell 
you saw me— your sister's fate is in your hands." So saying, he 
turned from her, and with a swift, yet cautiously noiseless step, 
plunged into the darkness on the side most remote from the sounds 
which they heard approaching, and was soon lost to her sight. 
Jeanie remained by the cairn terrified beyond expression, and un- 
certain whether she ought to fly homeward with all the speed she 
could exert, or wait the approach of those who were advancing 
towards her. This uncertainty detained her so long, that she now 
distinctly saw two or three figures already so near to her, that a 
precipitate flight would have been equally fruitless and impolitic. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTH tAN. 133 



CHAPTER XVI. 



-She speaks things in doubt, 



That carry but half sense : her speech is nothing, 
Yet the unshaped use of it doth move 
The hearers to collection ; they aim at it, 
And botch the words up to fit their own thoughts. 

Hamlet. 

_ Like the digressive poet Ariosto, I find myself under the neces- 
sity of connecting the branches of my story, by taking up the ad- 
ventures of another of the characters, and bringing them down to 
the point at which we have left those of Jeanie Deans. It is not, 
perhaps, the mosf artificial way of telling a story, but it has the 
advantage of sparing the necessity of resuming what a knitter (if 
stocking looms have left such a person in the land) might call our 
" dropped stitches ; " a labour in which the author generally toils 
much, without getting credit for his pains. 

" I could risk a sma' wad," said the clerk to the magistrate, 
" that this rascal Ratcliffe, if he were insured of his neck's safety, 
could do more than ony ten of our police-people and constables, to- 
help us to get out of this scrape of Porteous's. He is weel acquant 
wi' a' the smugglers, thieves, and banditti about Edinburgh ; and, 
indeed, he may be called the father of a' the misdoers in Scotland, 
for he has passed amang them for these twenty years by the name 
of Daddie Rat." 

" A bonny sort of a scoundrel," replied the magistrate, " to ex- 
pect a place under the city ! " 

" Begging your honour's pardon," said the city's procurator-fiscal, 
upon whom the duties of superintendent of police devolved, " Mr. 
Fairscrieve is perfectly in the right. It is just sic as Ratcliffe that 
the town needs in my department ; an' if sae be that he's disposed 
to turn his knowledge to the city service, ye'll no find a better man. 
— Ye'll get nae saints to be searchers for uncustomed goods, or for 
thieves and sic like ; — and your decent sort of men, religious pro- 
fessors, and broken tradesmen, that are put into the like o' sic trust, 
can do nae gude ava. They are feared for this, and they are scru- 
pulous about that, and they are na free to tell a lie, though it may 
be for the benefit of the city ; and they dinna like to be out at irre- 
gular hours, and in a dark cauld nicht, and they like a clout ower 
the croun far waur ; and sae between the fear o' God, and the fear 
o' man, and the fear o' getting a sair throat, or sair banes, there's a 
dozen o' our city-folk, baith waiters, and officers, and constables, 
that can find outnaething but a wee bit skulduddery for the benefit 
of the Kirk-treasurer. Jock Porteous, that's stiff and stark, puir 
fallow, was worth a dozen o' them ; for he never had ony fears, or 
scruples, or doubts, or conscience, about onything your honours 
bade him." 
■ " He was a gude servant o' the toun," said the Bailie, " though he 



134 THE HEART OF MID-ILOTHIAN, 

was an ower free-living man. But if you really think this rascal 
Ratcliffe could do us ony service in discovering these malefactors, 
I would insure him life, reward, and promotion. It's an awsome 
thing this mischance for the city, Mr. 'Fairscrieve. It will be very 
ill taen wi' abune stairs. Queen Caroline, God bless her ! is a 
woman — at least I judge sae, and it's naetreason to speak my mind 
sae far — and ye maybe' ken as weel as I do, for ye <hae a 'house- 
keeper, though ye arena a married map, that women are wilfu', and 
downa bide a slicht. And it will sound ill in her ears, that sic a 
confused mistake suld come to, pass, and naebody sae muckle as 
to be put into the Tolbooth about it." 

" If ye thought that, sir," said the procurator-fiscal, "we could 
easily clap into the prison a few blackguards upon suspicion. It 
will have a gude active look, and I hae aye plenty on my list, that 
wadna be a hair the waur of a week or twa's imprisonment ; and if 
ye thought it no strictly just, ye could be just the easier wi' them 
the neist time they did onything to deserve it ; they arena the sort 
to be lang o' gieing ye an opportunity to clear scores wi' them on 
that account." 

" I doubt that will hardly do in this case, Mr. Sharpitlaw," re- 
turned the town-clerk ; " they'll run their letters,* and be adrift 
again, before ye ken where ye are." 

" I will speak to the Lord Provost," said the magistrate, " about 
Ratcliffe's business. Mr. Sharpitlaw, you will go with me, and re- 
ceive instructions — something may be made too out of this story of 
Butler's and his unknown gentleman — I know no business any man 
has to swagger about in the King's Park, and call himself the devil, 
to the terror of honest folks, who dinna care to hear mair about the 
devil than is said from -the pulpifon the Sabbath. I cannot think 
the preacher himsell wad be heading the mob, though the time has 
been,, they hae been .as forward in a bruilzie as their neighbours." 

"^ut these times are lang by," said Mr. Sharpitlaw. "In my 
£atherVtime,-"there was mair search for silenced ministers about 
the'BDw-head and the Covenant-close, and all the tents of Kedar, 
as they ca'd'the dwellings o' the godly in those days, than there's 
now ^or thieves and vagabonds in the Laigh Calton and the back 
d^the Canongate. But that time's weel by, an it bide. And if the 
Bailie will get me directions and -authority from the Provost, I'll 
speak wi' DadcUe Rat mysell ; for I'm thinking I'll make mair out 
6" him than ye'll do." 

Mr. Sharpitlaw, being necessarily a man of high trust, was 
accordingly empowered, in the course of the day, to make such 
arrangements,.as might seem in the emergency most advantageous 
for the Good Town. He went to the jail accordingly, and saw 
Ratcliffe in'private. 

The relative positions of a police-officer and a professed thief 
bear a different complexion, according to circumstances. The most 
obvious simile of a hawk pouncing upon his Drey is often least 
applicable. Sometimes the guardian of justice "has the air of.a cat 
watching a mouse, and, while he suspends his purpose of springing 
upon the pilferer, -takes care so to calculate his -motions that he 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 13S 

shall not get beyoitd his power. Sometimes, more passive still, he 
uses the art of fascination ascribed to the rattlesnake, and contents 
himself with glaring on the victim, through all his devious flutter- 
ings ; certain that his terror, confusion, and disorder of ideas, will 
bring him into his jaws sX last. The interview between Ratcliffe 
and Sharpitlaw had an aspect different from all these. They sat 
for five minutes silent, on opposite sides of a small table, and 
looked fixedly at each other, with a sharp, knowing, and alert .cast 
of countenance, not unmingled with an inclination to laugh, and 
resembled, more than anything else, two dogs, who, preparing for 
a game at romps, are seen to couch, down, and remain in that pos- 
ture for. a little time, watching each other's movements, and waiting 
which shall begin the;game. 

"So, Mr. Ratcliffe," said the officer, conceiving it suited his 
dignity to speak first, "you give up business, I find ? " 

" Yes, sir," replied Ratcliffe ; " I shall be on that lay nae mair — 
and I think that will save your folk some trouble, Mr. Sharpitlaw ? " 

•" Which Jock Dalgleish " (then finisher of the law in the Scottish 
metropolis) " wad save them as easily," returned the procurator- 
fiscal. 

"Ay ; if I waited in the Tolbooth here to have him fit my cravat 
-^■but that's an idle way ,0' speaking, Mr. Sharpitlaw.". 

"Why, I suppose you know you are under sentence of death, Mr. 
jRatcliffe?" replied Mr. Sharpitlaw. 

"Ay, so are we a', as that worthy minister said in the Tolboo.tih. 
Kirk the day Robertson wan off ; but naebody.kens when it will be 
executed. Gude faith, - he had better reason ito say sae than he 
dreamed of, before the play w ; as played. out .that morning ! " 

" This Robertson," said Sharpitlaw, in a lower and something 
like a confidential tone, " d'ye ken, Rat— that is, can ye gie us ony 
inkling where he is to he heard tell o' ? " 

•"Troth, Mr. Sharpitlaw, I'll be frankiwi' ye ; 'Robertson itsrather 
a "cut .abune me — a- wild deevil he was, and mony.a daft prank he 
played ; but except the Collector's job that Wilson led -him into, 
and some tuibues about run goods wi' the gaugers and the waiters, 
henever did ony thing that came near our line o' business." 

■" Umph ! that's singular, considering the company he kept." 

" Fact, upon my honour and credit," said Ratcliffe, gravely. " He 
keepit out o' our little bits o' affairs, and that's mair than Wilson 
did ; I hae dune business wi' Wilson afore now. But the lad Will 
come on in time ; there's nae fear o' him; naebody will liv,e>the 
life he has led, but what he'll come to sooner or later." 

" Who or what is he, .Ratcliffe ? you know, I suppose ? " said 
Sharpitlaw. 

" He's .better born, I judge, than.he cares to let on ; he's been ia 
soldier, and,he has been a play-actor, and I watna what he has 
been orhasna been, for as young as he is, sae that it had daffing 
and nonsense about it." 

" Pretty pranks he has played in his time, I suppose t" 

" Ye may say that," said Ratcliffe, with a. sardonic smile ; "and," 
(touching his nose,) " a deevil amang the lasses." 



136 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" Like enough," said Sharpitlaw. " Weel,- Ratcliffe, I'll no stand 
niffering wi' ye ; ye ken the way that favour's gotten in my office ; 
ye maun be usefu'." 

" Certainly, sir, to the best of my power— naething for naething 
— I ken the rule of the office," said the ex-depredator. 

" Now the principal thing in, hand e'en now," said the official 
person, " is this job of Porteous's ; an ye can gie us a lift — why, the 
inner turnkey's office to begin wi', and the captainship in time-^ye 
understand my meaning ? " 

" Ay, troth do I, sir ; a wink's as gude as a nod to a blind hoise ; 
but Jock Porteous's job — Lord help ye ! — I was under sentence'the 
haill time. God ! but I couldna help laughing when I heard Jock 
skirling for mercy in the lads' hands ! Mony a het skin ye hae/gien 
me, neighbour, thought I, tak ye what's gaun : time about's fair 
play ; ye'll ken now what hanging's gude for." 

" Come, come, this is all nonsense, Rat," said the procurator. 
" Ye canna creep out at that hole, lad ; you must speak to the point, 
you understand me, if you want favour ; gif-gaf makes gude friends, 
ye ken." 

" But how can I speak to the point, as your honour ca's it," said 
Ratcliffe, demurely, and with an air of great simplicity, " when ye 
ken I was under sentence, and in the strong room a' the while the 
job was going on ? " 

" And how can we turn ye loose on the public again, Daddie Rat, 
unless ye do or say something to deserve it ? " 

"Well, then, d — n it ! " answered the criminal, " since it maun be 
sae, I saw Geordie Robertson among the boys that brake the jail ; 
I suppose that will do me some gude ? " 

" That's speaking to the purpose, indeed," said the office-bearer ; 
and now, Rat, where think ye we'll find him ? " 

" Deil haet o' me kens," said Ratcliffe ; " he'll no likely gang 
back to ony o' his auld howffs ; he'll be off the country by this time. 
He has gude friends some gate or other, for a' the life he's led ; 
he's been weel educate." 

" He'll grace the gallows the better," said Mr. Sharpitlaw ; " a 
desperate dog, to murder an officer of the city for doing his duty I 
Wha kens wha's turn it might be next ? But you saw him plainly ? " 

" As plainly as I see you." 

" How was he dressed ? " said Sharpitlaw. 

" I couldna weel see ; something of a woman's bit mutch on his 
head ; but ye never saw sic a ca'-throw. Ane couldna hae een to 
a' thing." 

" But did he speak to no one ? " said Sharpitlaw. 

" They were a' speaking and gabbling through ither," said Rat- 
cliffe, who was obviously unwilling to carry his evidence farther 
than he could possibly help. 

" This will not do, Ratcliffe," said the procurator ; " you must 
speak out — out — out" tapping the table emphatically, as he repeated 
that impressive monosyllable. 

" It's very hard, sir," said the prisoner ; " and but for the under- 
turnkey's place " 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 137 

"And the reversion of the captaincy — the captaincy of the 
Tolbooth, man — that is, in case of gude behaviour." 

" Ay, ay," said Ratcliffe, " gude behaviour ! — there's the deevil. 
And then it's waiting for dead folk's shoon into the bargain." 

" But Robertson's head will weigh something," said Sharpitlaw ; 
" something gay and heavy, Rat ; the town maun show cause — 
that's right and reason — and then ye'll hae freedom to enjoy your 
gear honestly." 

" I dinna ken," said Ratcliffe ; " it's a queer way o' beginning 
the trade of honesty — but deil ma care. Weel, then, I heard and 
saw him speak to the wench Effie Deans, that's up there for child- 
murder." 

" The deil ye did ? Rat, this is finding a mare's nast wi' a 
witness. — And the man that spoke to Butler in the Park, and that 
was to meet wi' Jeanie Deans at Muschat's Cairn— whew ! lay that 
and that together ? As sure as I live he's been the father of the 
lassie's wean." 

" There hae been waur guesses than that, I'm thinking," observed 
Ratcliffe, turning his quid of tobacco in his cheek, and squirting 
out the juice. " I heard something a while syne about his drawing 
up wi' a bonny quean about the Pleasaunts, and that it was a' 
Wilson could do to keep him frae marrying her." 

Here a city officer entered, and told Sharpitlaw that they had 
the woman in custody whom he had directed them to bring before 
him. 

" It's little matter now," said he, " the thing is taking another 
turn ; however, George, ye may bring her in." 

The officer retired, and introduced, upon his return, a tall, strap- 
ping wench of eighteen or twenty, dressed fantastically, in a sort of 
blue riding-jacket, with tarnished lace, her hair clubbed like that of 
a man, a Highland bonnet, and a bunch of broken feathers, a 
riding-skirt (or petticoat) of scarlet camlet, embroidered with 
tarnished flowers. Her features were coarse and masculine, yet at 
a little distance, by dint of very bright wild-looking black eyes, an 
aquiline nose, and a commanding profile, appeared rather hand- 
some. She flourished the switch she held in her hand, dropped a 
curtsey as low as a lady at a birth-night introduction, recovered 
herself seemingly according to Touchstone's directions to Audrey, 
and opened the conversation without waiting till any questions 
■were asked. 

" God gie your honour gude-e'en, and mony o' them, bonny 
Mr. Sharpitlaw ! — Gude-e'en to ye, Daddie Ratton — they tauld me 
ye were hanged, man ; or did ye get out o' John Dalgleish's hands 
like half-hangit Maggie Dickson ? " 

" Whisht, ye daft jaud," said Ratcliffe, " and hear what's said 
to ye." 

" Wi' a' rriy heart, Ratton. Great preferment for poor Madge to 
be brought up the street wi' a grand man, wi' a coat a' passemented 
wi' worset lace, to speak wi' provosts, and bailies, and town-clerks, 
and prokitors, at this time o' day — and the haill toun looking at me 
too — This is honour on earth for anes ! " 



r38 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

"Ay, Madge," said Mr. Sharpitlaw, in a coaxing tone; "and 
ye're dressed out in your braws, I see ; these are not your every- 
days' claiths ye have on." 

"Deil be in my fingers, then!" said Madge— " Eh, sirs !" 
(observing Butler come into the apartment,) " there's a minister in 
the Tolbooth — wha will ca' it a graceless place now ? — I'se warrant 
he's in for the gude auld cause— but it's be nae cause o' mine," and 
off she went into a song. 

"Hey for cavaliers, ho, for cavaliers, I Have at old Beelzebub,— 
Dub a dub, dub a dub ; | Oliver's squeaking for fear." 

" Did you ever see that mad woman before ? " said Sharpitlaw to 
Butler. 

"Not to my knowledge, sir," replied Butler. 

" I thought as much," said the procurator-fiscal, looking 'towards 
Ratcliffe, who answered his glance with a nod of acquiescence and 
intelligence.. 

" But that is Madge Wildfire, as she calls .herself," said the man 
of law to Butler. 

" Ay, that 1 am," said Madge, " and that I have been ever since 
I was something better — Heigh ho" — (and something like melan- 
choly dwelt on her features for a minute) — "Sut 1 canna mind 
when that was — it was lang syne, at ony rate, and 111 ne'er fash my 
thumb about it. — 

" I glance like the wildfire through country and town ; 
I'm seen on the causeway — I'm seen on the down ; 
The lightning that flashes so bright, and so free, 
.Is scarcely so blithe or so bonny as me." 

" Haud your tongue, ye skirling limmer ! " said the officer, who 
had acted as master of the ceremonies to this extraordinary per- 
former, and who was rather scandalized at the freedom of her 
demeanour before a person of Mr. Sharpitlaw's importance — " haud 
your tongue, or I'se gie ye something to skirl for ! " 

" Let her alone, George," said Sharpitlaw, " dinna put her .out 
o' tune ; I hae some questions to ask her— But first, Mr. Butler, 
take another look .of her." 

" Do sae, minister — do sae," cried Madge ; "lam as weel worth 
looking at as ony book in your aught. — And I can say the single 
carritch, and the double carritch, and justification, and effectual 
calling, and the assembly of divines at Westminster, that is," (she 
added in a low, tone,) " I could say them anes — but it's lang.syne — 
and ane forgets, ye ken." And poor Madge heaved another deep 
sigh. 

" Weel, sir," said Mr. Sharpitlaw to Butler, "what think ye now? 

"As I did before," said Butler; "that I never saw the poor 
demented .creature in my life before." 

" Then she is not the -person whom you said the rioters last night 
described as Madge Wildfire?"" 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 



*39 



"Certainly not," said Butler. "They may be near the same 
neigmyfor they are both tall, but I see little other resemblance." 

" Their dress, then, is not alike ? " said Sharpitlaw. 

" Not in the least," said Butler. 

" Madge, my bonny woman," said Sharpitlaw, in the same 
coaxing manner, " what did ye do wi' your ilka-days' olais.e yester- 
day?" 

" I dinna mind," said Madge. 

" Where was ye yesterday at e'en, Madge ? " 

" I dinna mind onything about yesterday,'' answered Madge ; 
" ae day is eneugh for pnybody to wun ower wi' at a time, and ower 
muckle sometimes." 

" But maybe, Madge, ye -wad mind something about it, if I was 
to gie ye this half-crown ? " said Sharpitlaw, taking out, the piece of 
money. 

" That might gar me laugh, but it couldna gar me mind." 

"But, Madge," continued Sharpitlaw, "were I to send you to the 
wark-house in Leith Wynd, and gar Jock Dalgleish laythe.tawse 
on your back " 

" That wad gar me greet,". said Madge, sobbing, "but it couldna 
gar me mind, ye ken." 

" She is ower far past reasonable folk's motives, sir," said Rat- 
cliffe, " to mind -siller or John Dalgleish, or the cat-and-nine-tails 
either, but I think I could gar her tell us something." 

" Try her then, Ratcliffe," said Sharpitlaw, " for I am tired of her 
crazy pate, and .be d — d to her." 

" Madge," said Ratcliffe, " hae ye ony joes now ?'" 

" An onybody ask ye, say ye dinna.ken. — Set him to be speaking 
of my joes, auld Daddie Ratton ! " 

" I dare say, ye hae deil ane ? " 

" See if I haena then," said Madge, with the toss of the head of 
affronted beauty—" there's Rob the Ranter, and Will Fleming,, and 
then there's Geordie Robertson, lad — that's Gentleman Geordie-r- 
what think ye o' that ? " 

; Ratcliffe laughed, and, winking to the procurator-fiscal, pursued 
the inquiry in his own way. " But, Madge, the lads only like ye 
when ye hae on your braws — rthey wadna touch you wi' a pair 
o' tangs when you are in your auld ilka-day rags." 

•" Ye're a leeing .auld sorrow then," replied the fair one ; " for 
Gentle Geordie Robertson put my ilka-days', claise on his ain bonny 
sell yestreen, and gaed -a' through the toun wi' ,them ; and gawsie 
and.grand he lookit, like ony queen in the land." 

" I dinna believe a word o't," said Ratcliffe, with another wink to 
the procurator. " Thae duds were a' o' the colour o' moonshine in 
the water, I'm thinking, Madge — The gown wad .be a sky-blue 
scarlet, I'se warrant ye ?" 

" It was nae sic thing," said Madge, whose unretentive memory 
let out, in the eagerness of contradiction, all .that she would have 
most wished to keep concealed, had her judgment been equal to 
her inclination. " It was neither scarlet nor sky-blue, but. my ain 
auld brown .threshie-coat of a shortrgown, and my mother's ,auld 



140 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

mutch and my red rokelay — and he gaed me a croun and a kiss for 
the use o' them, blessing on his bonny face — though it's been a dear 
ane to me." 

"And where did he change his clothes again, hinnie?" said 
Sharpitlaw, in his most conciliatory manner. 

" The procurator's spoiled a'," observed Ratcliffe, dryly. 

And it was even so ; for the question, put in so direct a shape, 
immediately awakened Madge to the propriety of being reserved 
upon those very topics on which Ratcliffe had indirectly seduced 
her to become communicative. 

"What was 't ye were speering at us, sir?" she resumed, with an 
appearance of stolidity so speedily assumed, as showed there was a 
good deal of knavery mixed with her folly. 

" I asked you," said the procurator, " at what hour, and to what 
place, Robertson brought back your clothes." 

" Robertson ? — Lord haud a care o' us ! what Robertson ? " 

" Why, the fellow we were speaking of, Gentle Geordie, as you 
call him." 

" Geordie Gentle ! " answered Madge, with well-feigned amaze- 
ment — " I dinna ken naebody they ca' Geordie Gentle." 

" Come, my jo," said Sharpitlaw, " this will not do ; you must 
tell us what you did with these clothes of yours." 

Madge Wildfire made no answer, unless the question may seem 
connected with the snatch of a song with which she indulged the 
embarrassed investigator : — 

" What did ye wi' the bridal ring — bridal ring — bridal ring ? 
What did ye wi' your wedding ring, ye little cutty quean, 0? 
I gied it till a sodger, a sodger, a sodger, 
I gied it till a sodger, an auld true love o' mine, O." 

Of all the madwomen who have sung and said, since the days of 
Hamlet the Dane, if Ophelia be the most affecting, Madge 
Wildfire was the most provoking. 

The procurator-fiscal was in despair. " I'll take some measures 
with this d — d Sess of Bedlam," said he, " that shall made her 
find her tongue." 

" Wi' your favour, sir," said Ratcliffe, " better let her mind settle 
a little — Ye have aye made out something." 

" True," said the official person ; " a brown short-gown, mutch, 
red rokelay — that agrees with your Madge Wildfire, Mr. Butler?" 
Butler agreed that it did so. " Yes, there was a sufficient motive 
for taking this crazy creature's dress and name, while he was about 
such a job." 

" And I am free to say now," said Ratcliffe 

"When you see it has come out without you," interrupted 
Sharpitlaw. 

" Just sae, sir," reiterated Ratcliffe. " I am free to say now, 
since it's come out otherwise, that these were the clothes I saw 
Robertson wearing last night in the jail, when he was at the head 
of the rioters." 

" That's direct evidence," said Sharpitlaw ; " stick to that, Rat— 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. j 4 i 

I will report favourably of you to the provost, for I have business 
for you to-night. It wears late ; I must home and get a snack, and 
I'll be back in the evening. Keep Madge with you, Ratcliffe, and 
try to get her into a good tune again." So saying, he left the 
prison. 



CHAPTER XVII. 



And some they whistled — and some they sang, 

And some did loudly say, 
Whenever Lord Barnard's horn it blew, 

"Away, Musgrave, away!" 

Ballad of Little Musgrave. 

When the man of office returned to the Heart of Mid-Lothian, 
he resumed his conference with Ratcliffe, of whose experience and 
assistance he now held himself secure. " You must speak with 
this wench, Rat — this Effie Deans — you must sift her a wee bit ; 
for as sure as a tether she will ken Robertson's haunts — till her, 
Rat — till her, without delay." 

" Craving your pardon, Mr. Sharpitlaw," said the turkney elect, 
" that's what I am not free to do." 

" Free to do, man ? what the deil ails ye now ? — I thought we 
had settled a' that?" 

" I dinna ken, sir," said Ratcliffe ; " I hae spoken to this Effie — 
she's strange to this place and to its ways, and to a' our ways, 
Mr. Sharpitlaw ; and she greets, the silly tawpie, and she's 
breaking her heart already about this wild chield ; and were she 
the means o' takin him, she wad break it outright." 

" She wunna hae time, lad," said Sharpitlaw ; " the woodie will 
hae its ain o' her before that — a woman's heart takes a lang time 
o' breaking." 

" That's according to the stuff they are made o', sir," replied 
Ratcliffe — " But to make a lang tale short, I canna undertake the 
job. It gangs against my conscience." 

" Your conscience, Rat ? " said Sharpitlaw, with a sneer, which 
the reader will probably think very natural upon the occasion. 

"Ou ay, sir," answered Ratcliffe, calmly, "just my conscience; 
aTsody has a conscience, though it may be ill wunnin at it. I think 
mine's as weel out o' the gate as maist folk's are ; and yet it's just 
like the noop of my elbow, it whiles gets a bit dirl on a corner." 

" Weel, Rat," replied SharpuTaw, " since ye are nice, I'll speak to 
the hussy mysell." 

Sharpitlaw, accordingly, caused himself to be introduced into 
the little dark apartment tenanted by the unfortunate Effie Deans. 
The poor girl was seated on her little flock-bed, plunged in a 
deep reverie. Some food stood on the table, of a quality better 
than is usually supplied to prisoners, but it was untouched. The 
person under whose care she was more particularly placed, said, 



143 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" that sometimes she; tasted naething from the tae end of the-foois- 
and-twenty hours to the t'other, except a drink of water." 

Sharpitlaw took a chair, and, commanding the turnkey to retire, 
he opened- the conversation, endeavouring to throw into his tone 
and countenance as much commiseration as they were capable 
of expressing, for the one was sharp and harsh, the other sly, 
acute, and selfish. 

" How's a' wi' ye, Effie — How d'ye find yourself, hinny?" 

A deep sigh was the only answer. 

" Are thofolk civil to ye, Effie ?— it's my duty to inquire." 

" Very civil, sir," said Effie, compelling, herself to answer, yet 
hardly knowing what she said. 

"And your victuals," continued Sharpitlaw, in the same eon- 
doling tone — "do you get what you like? — or is there onything 
you would particularly fancy, as your health seems but silly ? " 

" It's a' very weel, sir, I thank ye," said the poor prisoner, in a 
tone how different from the sportive vivacity of those of the Lily 
of St. Leonard's ! — " it's a' very gude— ower gude for me." 

" He must have been a great villain, Effie, who brought you to 
this pass," said Sharpitlaw. 

The remark was dictated partly by a natural feeling, of which 
even he could not divest himself, though accustomed to practise pn 
the passions of others, and keep a most heedful guard over his 
own, and partly by his wish to introduce the sort of conversation 
which might best serve his immediate purpose. Indeed,' upon.the 
present occasion, these mixed motives of feeling and cunning" har- 
monized together, wonderfully ; for, said Sharpitlaw to himself,, the 
greater rogue Robertson is, the more will be. the merit of bringing 
him to justice. " He must have been a great villain, indeed," he 
again reiterated ; "and Iwish I had the skelping o' him." 

" I may blame mysell mair than him," said Effie ; " I' was bred 
up to ken better ; but he, poor fellow," (she stopped). 

" Was a thorough blackguard a' his life, I dare say," said 
Sharpitlaw. " A stranger he was in this country, and a companion 
of that lawless vagabond, Wilson, I think, Effie ? " 

" It wad hae been dearly telling him that he had ne'er seen 
Wilson's face." 

" That's very true that you are saying, Effie," said Sharpitlaw. 
" Where was't that Robertson and you were used to howff the- 
gither? Somegate aboutthe Laigh. Calton, I am thinking." 

The simple and dispirited girl had thus far followed Mr. Sharpit- 
laVs lead, because he had artfully adjusted his observations to 
the thoughts he was pretty certain must be passing through her 
own mind, so that her answers became a kind of thinking aloud, 
a mood into which those who are either constitutionally absent 
in mind r or are rendered so by the temporary pressure of mis- 
fortune, may be easily led by a skilful train of suggestions. But 
the last observation of the procurator-fiscal was too much of the 
nature of a direct interrogatory, and it broke the charm ac- 
cordingly. 

" What was it that I was saying ? " said Effie, starting up from 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 143 

her reclining' pqsture, seating herself upright, and hastily shading 
her dishevelled hair back from her wasted but still beautiful 
countenance. She fixed her eyes boldly and keenly upon SharpiN 
law : — " You are too much of a gentleman, sir, — too much of an 
honest man, to take any notice of what a poor creature like me 
says, that can hardly ca' my senses my ain — God help me ! " 

" Advantage ! — I would be of some advantage to you if I could," 
said Sharpitlaw, in a soothing tone ; " and I ken naething sae 
likely to serve ye, Effie, as gripping this rascal, Robertson." 

" O dinna misca' him, sir, that never misca'd you ! — Robertson ? 
— I am sure I had naething to say against ony man o' the name, 
and naething will I say. 

" But if you do not heed your own misfortune, Effie, you should 
mind what distress he has brought on your family," said the man 
of law. 

" O, Heaven help me ! " exclaimed poor Effie — ( ' My poor father 
— my dear Jeanie — O, that's sairest to bide of a' ! O, sir, if you 
hae ony kindness — if ye hae ony touch of compassion — for a 1 the 
folk . I see here are as hard as the wa'-stanes — If ye wad but bid' 
them let my sister Jeanie- in the next time she ca's! for when I 
hear them put her awa frae the door, and canna climb up to that 
high window to see sae muckle as her gown-tail, it's like to pit 
me out o' my judgment." And she looked on him with a face of 
entreaty so earnest, yet so humble, that she fairly shook the stead- 
fast purpose of his mind. 

"You shall see your sister," he began, "if you'll tell me;" 1 — then 
interrupting himself, he added, in a more hurried tone, — "no, 
tfc — n itj you shall see your sister whether you tell me anything or 
no." So saying, he rose up and left the apartment. 

When he had rejoined Ratcliffe, he observed, " You are right, 
Ratton ; there's no making much of that lassie: But ae thing I 
have cleared — that is 5 that Robertson has been the father of the 
bairn, and so I will wager a boddle it will be he that's to meet wi' 
Jeanie Deans this night at Muschat's Cairn, and there we'll' nail 
him, Rat, or my name is not Gideon Sharpitlaw." 

" But," said Ratcliffe, perhaps because he was in no hurry to' see 
anything which was like to be connected with the discovery and 
apprehension of Robertson, " an that were the case,. Mr. Butler wad 
hae ken'd the man in the King's Park to be the same person wi' him 
in Madge Wildfire's claise, that headed the mob." 

"That makes nae difference, man," replied Sharpitlaw-^" the 
dress, the light, the confusion, and maybe a touch o' a blackit cork, 
or a slake o' paint — hout, Ratton, I have seen ye dress your ainsell 
that the deevil ye belang to durstna hae made oath t'ye." 

" And that's true, too," said Ratcliffe. 

"And besides, ye donnard carle," continued Sharpitlaw, trium- 
phantly, " the minister did say, that he thought he knew some- 
thing of the features of the birkie that spoke to him in the Park, 
though he could not charge his memory where, or when he had 
seen them." 

" It's evident, then, your horrcrar will beright," said Ratcliffe. 



144 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" Then, Rat, you and I will go with the party oursells this night, 
and see him in grips, or we are done wi' him." 

" I seena muckle use I can be o' to your honour," said Ratcliffe, 
reluctantly. 

"Use?" answered Sharpitlaw— "You can guide the party— you 
ken the ground. Besides, I do not intend to quit sight o' you, my 
good friend, till I have him in hand." ' 

"Weel, sir," said Ratcliffe, but in no joyful tone of ac- 
quiescence; "ye maun hae it your ain way — but mind he's a 
desperate man." 

"We shall have that with us," answered Sharpitlaw, "that will 
settle him, if it is necessary." 

" But, sir," answered Ratcliffe, " I am sure I couldna undertake 
to guide you to Muschat's Cairn in the night-time ; I ken the place, 
as mony does, in fair day-light, but how to find it by moonshine, 
amang sae mony crags and stanes, as like to each other as the 
collier to the deil, is mair than I can tell. I might as soon seek 
moonshine in water." 

" What's the meaning o' this, Ratcliffe ? " said Sharpitlaw, while 
he fixed his eye on the recusant, with a fatal and ominous expres- 
sion, — " Have you forgotten that you are still under sentence of 
death?" 

" No sir," said Ratcliffe, " that's a thing no easily put out o' 
memory ; and if my presence be judged necessary, nae doubt I maun 
gang wi' your honour. But I was gaun to tell your honour of ane 
that has mair skeel o' the gate than me, and that's e'en Madge 
Wildfire." 

" The devil she has ! — Do you think me as mad as she is, to 
trust to her guidance on such an occasion ? " 

" Your honour is the best judge," answered Ratcliffe ; " but I 
ken I can keep her in tune, and garr her haud the straight path — 
she often sleeps out, or rambles about amang thae hills the haul 
simmer night, the daft limmer." 

" Well, Ratcliffe," replied the procurator-fiscal, " if you think she 
can guide us the right way — but take heed to what you are about — 
your life depends on your behaviour." 

" It's a sair judgment on a man,* said Ratcliffe, " when he has 
ance gane sae far wrang as I hae done, that deil a bit he can be 
honest, try't whilk way he will." 

Such was the reflection of Ratcliffe, when he was left for a few 
minutes to himself, while the retainer of justice went to procure a 
proper warrant and give the necessary directions. 

The rising moon saw the whole party free from the walls of the 
city and entering upon the open ground. Arthur's Seat, like a 
couchant lion of immense size — Salisbury Crags, like a huge belt 
or girdle of granite, were dimly visible. Holding their path along 
the southern side of the Canongate, they gained the Abbey of Holy- 
roodhouse, and from thence found their way by step and stile into 
the King's Park. They were at first four in number — an officer of 
justice and Sharpitlaw, who were well armed with pistols and cut- 
lasses ; Ratcliffe, who was not trusted with weapons, lest he might, 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 145 

peradventure, have used them on the wrong side ; and the female. 
But at the last stile, when they entered the Chase, they were joined 
by other two officers, whom Sharpitlaw, desirous to secure suffi- 
cient force for his purpose, and at the same time to avoid observa- 
tion, had directed to wait for him at this place. Ratcliffe saw this 
accession of strength with some disquietude, for he had hitherto 
thought it likely that Robertson, who was a bold, stout, and active 
young fellow, might have made his escape from Sharpitlaw and the 
single officer, by force or agility, without his being implicated in 
the matter. But the present strength of the followers of justice was 
overpowering, and the only mode of saving Robertson, (which the 
old sinner was well disposed to do, providing always he could ac- 
complish his purpose without compromising his own safety,) -must 
be by contriving that he should have some signal of their approach. 
It was probably with this view that Ratcliffe had requested the 
addition of Madge to the party, having considerable confidence in 
her propensity to exert her lungs. Indeed, she had already given 
them so many specimens of her clamorous loquacity, that Sharpit- 
law half determined to send her back with one of the officers, 
rather than carry forward in his company a person so extremely ill 
qualified to be a guide in a secret expedition. It seemed, too, as if 
the open air, the approach to the hills, and the ascent of the moon, 
supposed to be so portentous over those whose brain is infirm, 
made her spirits rise in a degree tenfold more loquacious than she 
had hitherto exhibited. To silence her by fair means seemed im- 
possible ; authoritative commands and coaxing entreaties she set 
alike at defiance, and threats only made her sulky and altogether 
intractable. 

" Is there no one of you," said Sharpitlaw, impatiently, " that 
knows the way to this accursed place — this Nicol Muschat's 
Cairn — excepting this mad clavering idiot ? " 

" Deil ane o' them kens it, except mysell," exclaimed Madge ; 
" how suld they, the pure fule cowards ! But I hae sat on the grave 
frae bat-fleeing time till cock-crow, and had mony a fine crack wi' 
Muschat and Ailie Muschat, that are lying sleeping below." 

" The devil take your crazy brain," said Sharpitlaw ; " will you 
not allow the men to answer a question ? " 

The officers, obtaining a moment's audience while Ratcliffe 
diverted Madge's attention, declared that, though they had a 
general knowledge of the spot, they could not undertake to guide 
the party to it by the uncertain light of the moon, with such accu- 
racy as to ensure success to their expedition. 
. " What shall we do, Ratcliffe ? " said Sharpitlaw j " if he sees us 
before we see him,— and that's what he is certain to do, if we go 
strolling about, without keeping the straight road, — we may bid 
gude-day to the job ; and I would rather lose one hundred pounds, 
baith for the credit of the police, and because the Provost says 
somebody maun be hanged for this job o' Porteous, come o't what 
likes." 

" I think," said Ratcliffe, " we maun just try Madge ; and I'll see 
if I can get her keepit in ony better order. And at ony rate, if 

K 



146 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

he suld hear her skirling her auld ends o' sangs, he's no to ken fee 
that that there's onybody wi' her." 

" Thaf s true," said Sharpitlaw ; " and if he thinks her alone, he's 
as like to come towards her as to rin frae her. So set forward — we 
hae lost ower muckle time already— see to get her to keep the right 
road." 

" And what sort o' house does Nicol Muschat and his wife keep 
now ? " said Ratcliffe to the mad woman, by way of humouring her 
vein of folly ; " they were but thrawn folk lang syne, an a' tales be 
true." 

" Ou, ay, ay, ay-*-but a's forgotten now," replied Madge, in the 
confidential tone of a gossip giving the history of her next-door 
neighbour — " Ye see, I spoke to them mysell, and tauld them by- 
ganes suld be byganes — her throat's sair misguggled and mashack- 
ered though ; she wears her corpse-sheet drawn weel up to hide it, 
but that canna hinder the bluid seiping through, ye ken. I wussed 
her to wash it in St. Anthony's Well, and that will cleanse if ,ony- 
thing can — But they say bluid never bleaches out o' linen claith — 
Deacon Sanders's new cleansing draps winna do't — I tried them 
mysell on a bit rag we hae at hame that was mailed wi'the bluid of 
a bit skirling wean that was hurt some gate, but out it winna come 
-r-Weel, ye'll say that's queer ; but I will bring it out to St. Anthony's 
blessed Well some braw nicht just like this, and I'll cry up Ailie 
Muschat, and she and I will hae a grand bouking-washing, and 
bleach our claise in the beams of the bonny Lady Moon, that's far 
pleasanter to me than the sun — the sun's ower het, and ken ye, 
cummers, my brains are het eneugh already. But the moon, and 
the dew, and the night wind, they are just like a caller kail-blade 
laid on my brow ; and whiles I think the moon just shines on pur- 
pose to pleasure me, when naebody sees her but mysell." 

This raving discourse she continued with prodigious volubility, 
walking on at a great pace, and dragging Ratcliffe along with her, 
while he endeavoured, in appearance at least, if not in reality, to 
induce her to moderate her voice. 

All at once, she stopped short upon the top of a little hillock, 
gazed upward fixedly, and said not one word for the space of five 
minutes. "What the devil is the matter with her now?" said' 
Sharpitlaw to Ratcliffe — " Can you not get her forward?" 

" Ye maun just tak a grain o' patience wi' her, sir," said Ratcliffe. 
" She'll no gae a foot faster than she likes hersell." ' 

" D — n her," said Sharpitlaw, " I'll take care she has her time in 
Bedlam or Bridewell, or both, for she's both mad and mischievous." 

In the meanwhile, Madge, who had looked very pensive when she 
first stopped, suddenly burst into a vehement fit of laughter, then 
paused and sighed bitterly, — then was seized with a second fit of 
laughter,— then, fixing her eyes on the moon, lifted up her voice 
and sung, — 

" Good even, good fair moon, good even to thee ; 
I prithee, dear moon, now show to me 
The form and the features, the speech and degree, 
Of the man that true lover of mine shall be. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 147 

But I need not ask that of the bonny Lady Moon — I ken that 
weel eneugh myself— true-love though he wasna — But maebody shall 
sae that I ever tauld a word about the matter--But whiles I wish 
the bairn had lived — Weel, God guide us, there's a heaven aboon 
us a'/' — (here she sighed bitterly,)' " and a bonny moon; and sterns 
in it forby " (and here she laughed once more). 

" Are we to stand here all night ? " said Sharpitlaw, very impa- 
tiently. " Drag her forward." 

" Ay, sir," said Ratcliffe, " if we kend whilk way to drag her, that 
would settle it at ance. — Come, Madge, hinny," addressing her, "we'll 
110 he in time to see Nicol and his wife, unless you show us the road." 

" In troth and' that I will, Ratton," said she, seizing him by the 
arm, and resuming her route with huge strides, considering it was 
a female who took them. " And I'll' tell ye, Ratton, blithe will 
Nicol Muschat be to see ye, for he says he kens weel there isna 
sic a villain out o' hell as ye are,- and he wad be ravished to hae a 
crack wi' you — like to like, ye ken — it's a proverb never fails — and 
ye are baith a pair o' the deevil's peats, I trow — hard to ken whilk 
deserves the hettest corner o' his ingle-side." 

Ratcliffe was. conscience-struck, and could not forbear making an 
involuntary protest against this classification. " I never shed 
blood," he replied. 

" But ye hae sauld it, Ratton — ye hae sauld blood mony a time. 
Folk kill wi' the tongue as weel as with the hand — wi' the word as 
weel as wi'- the gulley ! — 

'It is the bonny butcher lad, I He sells the flesh on Saturday, 

That wears the sleeves of blue, | On Friday that he slew.'" 

" And what is that I am doing now ! " thought Ratcliffe. " But 
I'll hae nae wyte of Robertson's young bluidj if I can help it ; " 
then speaking apart to Madge, he asked her, " Whether she did 
not remember ony o' her auld sangs ? " 

" Mony a dainty ane," said Madge ; " and blithely can I sing 
them, for lightsome sangs make merry gate."' And she sang, — 

" When the gled's in the blue cloud, 

The lavrock lies still ; 
When the hound's in the green-wood, 

The hind keeps the hill." 

" Silence her cursed noise, if you should throttle her,'' said 
Sharpitlaw ; " I see somebody yonder. — Keep close, my boys, and 
creep round the shoulder of the height. George Poinder, stay you- 
with Ratcliffe and that mad yelling bitch ; and you other two, come 
with me round under the shadow of the brae." 

And he crept forward with the stealthy pace of an Indian savage, 
wholeads his band to surprise an unsuspecting party of some hos- 
tile tribe. Ratcliffe saw them glide off, avoiding the moonlight, 
and keeping as- much in the shade as possible: "Robertson's done 
up;" said he to himself ; " thae young lads are aye sae thoughtless. 
What the deevil could he hae to say to Jeanie Deans; or to ony 
woman on earth, that he suld gang awa and get his neck raxed for 

K 2 • 



148 - THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

her? And this mad quean, after cracking like a pen-gun, and 
skirling like a pea-hen for the haill night, behoves just to hae 
hadden her tongue when her clavers might have done some gude ! 
But it's aye the way wi' women ; if they ever haud their tongues 
ava', ye may swear it's for mischief. I wish I could set her on 
again without this blood-sucker kenning what I am doing. But 
he's as gleg as MacKeachan's elshin, that ran through sax plies of 
bend-leather and half an inch into the king's heel." 

He then began to hum, but in a very low and suppressed tone, 
the first stanza of a favourite ballad of Wildfire's, the words of 
which bore some distant analogy with the situation of Robertson, 
trusting that the power of association would not fail to bring the 
rest to her mind : 

" There's a bloodhound ranging Tinwald wood, 
There's harness glancing sheen ; 

There's a maiden sits on Tinwald brae, 
And she sings loud between." 

Madge had no sooner received the catch-word, than she vindi- 
cated Ratcliffe's sagacity by setting off at score with the song : 

" O sleep ye sound, Sir James, she said, 

When ye suld rise and ride ? 
There's twenty men, wi' bow and blade, 

Are seeking where ye hide." 

Though Ratcliffe was at a considerable distance from the spot 
called Muschat's Cairn, yet his eyes, practised like those of a cat to 
penetrate darkness, could mark that Robertson had caught the 
alarm. George Poinder, less keen of sight, or less attentive, was 
not aware of his flight anymore than Sharpitlaw and his assistants, 
whose view, though they were considerably nearer to the cairn, was 
intercepted by the broken nature of the ground under which they 
were screening themselves. At length, however, after the interval of 
five or six minutes, they also perceived that Robertson had fled, and 
rushed hastily towards the place, while Sharpitlaw called out aloud 
in the harshest tones of a voice which resembled a saw-mill at work, 
" Chase, lads — chase — haud the brae — I see him on the edge of the 
hill ! " Then hollowing back to the rear-guard of his detachment, 
he issued his farther orders : " Ratcliffe, come here, and detain the 
woman — George, run and kepp the stile at the Duke's Walk — 
Ratcliffe, come here directly — but first knock out that mad bitch's 
brains ! " , 

"Ye had better rin for it, Madge," said Ratcliffe, "for it's ill 
dealing wi' an angry man." 

Madge Wildfire was not so absolutely void of common sense as 
not to understand this inuendo ; and while Ratcliffe, in seemingly 
anxious haste of obedience, hastened to the spot where Sharpitlaw 
waited to deliver up Jeanie Deans to his custody, she fled with all 
the despatch she could exert in an opposite direction. Thus the 
whole party were separated, and in rapid motion of flight or pur- 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 149 

teuit, excepting Ratcliffe and Jeanie, whom, although making no 
attempt at escape, he held fast by the cloak, and who remained 
standing by Muschat's Cairn. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 



You have paid the heavens your function, and the prisoner the very 
debt of your calling. Measure for Measure. 

Jeanie DEANS, — for here our story unites itself with that part of 
the narrative which broke off at the end of the fifteenth chapter, — 
while she waited, in terror and amazement, the hasty advance of 
three or four men towards' her, was yet more startled at their sud- 
denly breaking asunder, and giving chase in different directions to 
the late object of her terror, who became at that moment, though 
she could not well assign a reasonable cause, rather the cause of 
her interest. One of the party (it was Sharpitlaw) came straight up 
to her, and saying, " Your name is Jeanie Deans, and you are my > 
prisoner," immediately added^ ''but if you will tell me which way 
lie ran I will let you go." 

" I dinna ken, sir," was all the poor girl could utter ; and, indeed, 
it is the phrase which rises most readily to the lips of any person 
in her rank, as the readiest reply to any embarrassing question. 

" But," said Sharpitlaw, " ye kenwha. it was ye were speaking wi', 
my leddy, on the hill side, and midnicht sae near; ye surely ken 
that, my bonny woman ? " 

" I dinna ken, sir," again iterated Jeanie, who really did not 
comprehend in her terror the nature of the questions which were so 
hastily put to her in this moment of surprise. 

" We will try to mend your memory by-and-by, hinny/' said 
Sharpitlaw, and shouted, as we have already tpld the reader, to 
Ratcliffe to come up and take charge of her, while he himself di- 
rected the chase after Robertson, which he still hoped might be 
successful. As Ratcliffe approached, Sharpitlaw pushed the young 
woman towards him with some rudeness, and betaking himself to 
the more important object of his quest, began to scale crags and 
scramble up steep banks, with an agility of which his profession 
and his general gravity of demeanour would previously have argued 
him incapable. In a few minutes there was no one within sight, 
and only a distant halloo from one of the pursuers to the other, 
faintly heard on the side of the hill, argued that there was any one 
within hearing. Jeanie Deans was left in the clear moonlight, 
standing under the guard of a person of whom she knew nothing,, 
and, what was worse, concerning whom, as the reader is well 
aware, she could have learned nothing that would not have in- 
creased her terror. 

When all in the distance was silent, Ratcliffe for the first time 
addressed her, and it was in that cold sarcastic indifferent tone 
familiar to habitual depravity, whose crimes are instigated by cus- 



igo THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

torn ratjher than by passion. " This is a braw nicht for ye, dearie," 
he said, attempting to pass his arm across her shoulder, " to be on 
the green hill wi' your jo." Jeanie extricated herself from his 
grasp, but did not make any reply. " I think lads and lasses," 
continued the ruffian, " dinna meet at Muschat's Cairn at midnicht 
to crack nuts'," and he again attempted to take hold of her. 

" If ye are an officer of justice, sir," said Jeanie, again eluding 
his attempt to seize her, "ye deserve to have your coat stripped 
from your back." 

'" Very true, hinny," said he, succeeding forcibly in his attempt 
to get hold of her, " but suppose 1 should strip your cloak off 
first?" 

" Ye are more a man, I am sure, than to hurt me, sir," said 
Jeanie; "for God's sake have pity on a half-distracted creature!" 

" Come, come," said Ratcliffe, " you're a good-looking wench, 
and should not be cross-grained. I was going to be an honest 
man — but the devil has this very day flung first a lawyer, and then 
a woman, in my gate. I'll tell you what, Jeanie, they are out on 
the hill-side — if you'll be guided by me, I'll carry you to a wee bit 
corner in the Heasance, that I ken o' in an auld wife's, that 
a' the prokitors o' Scotland wot naething o', and we'll send 
Robertson word to meet us in Yorkshire, for there is a set o' 
braw lads about the midland counties, that I hae dune business 
wi' before now, and sae we'll leave Mr. Sharpitlasw to whistle on his 
thumb." 

,It was fortunate for Jeanie, in an emergency like the present, 
that she possessed presence of mind and courage, so soon as the 
first hurry of surprise had enabled her to rally her recollection. 
She saw the risk she was in from a ruffian, who not only was such 
by profession, but had that evening been stupifying, by means of 
strong liquors, the internal aversion which he felt at the business 
on which Sharpitlaw had resolved to employ him. 

"Dinna spealc sae loud," said she, in a low voice, "he's up 
yonder." 

" Who ? — Robertson ! " said Ratcliffe, eagerly. 

" Aye," replied Jeanie ; " up yonder ; " and she pointed to the 
ruins of the hermitage and chapel. 

" By G— d, then," said Ratcliffe, " I'll make my ain of him, either 
one way or other — wait for me here." 

But no sooner had he set off, as fast as he could run, towards 
the chapel, than Jeanie started in an opposite direction, over high 
and low, on the nearest path homeward. Her juvenile exercise as 
a herdswoman had put " life and mettle " in her heels, and never 
had she followed Dustiefoot, when the cows were in the corn, with 
half so much speed as she now cleared the distance betwixt Mus- 
chat's Cairn and her father's cottage at Saint Leonard's. To lift 
the latch — to enter — to shut, bolt, and double bolt the door—to 
draw against it a heavy article of furniture, (which she could not 
have moved in a moment of less energy,) so as to make yet farther 
provision against violence, was almost the work of a moment, yet 
done with such silence as equalled the celerity. 



THE HEART OF MID-I.OTHIAN. 151 

Her next anxiety was upon her father's account, and she drew 
silently to the door of his apartment, in order to satisfy herself 
whether he had been disturbed by her return. He was awake, — 
probably had slept but little ; but the constant presence of his own 
sorrows, the distance of his apartment from the outer door of the 
house, and the precautions which Jeanie had taken to conceal her 
departure and return, had prevented him from being sensible of 
either. He was engaged in his devotions, and Jeanie could dis- 
tinctly hear him use these words : " And for the other child thou 
hast given me to be a comfort and stay to my old age, may her 
days be long in the land, according to the promise thou hast given 
to those who shall honour father and mother ; may all her pur- 
chased and promised blessings be multiplied upon her ; keep her in 
the watches of the night, and in the uprising of the morning, that 
all in this land may know that thou hast not utterly hid thy face 
From those that seek thee in truth and in sincerity." He was silent, 
but probably continued his petition in the strong fervency of 
mental devotion. 

His daughter retired to her apartment, comforted, that while she 
was exposed to danger, her head had been covered by the prayers 
of the just as by an helmet, and under the strong confidence, that 
while she walked worthy of the protection of Heaven, she would 
experience its countenance. It was in that moment that a vague 
idea first darted across her mind, that something might yet be 
achieved for her sister's safety, conscious as she now was of her 
innocence of the unnatural murder with which she stood charged. 
It came, as she described it, on her mind, like a sun-blink on a 
stormy sea ; and although it instantly vanished, yet she felt a de- 
gree of composure which she had not experienced for many days, 
and could not help being strongly persuaded that, by some means 
or other, she would be called upon, and directed, to work out her 
sister's deliverance. She went to bed, not forgetting her usual de- 
votions, the more fervently made on account of her late deliver- 
ance, and she slept soundly in spite of her agitation. 

We must return to Ratcliffe, who had started, like a greyhound 
from the slips when the sportsman cries halloo, as soon as Jeanie 
.had pointed to the ruins. Whether he meant to aid Robertson's 
escape, or to assist his pursuers, may be very doubtful ; perhaps he 
did not himself know, but had resolved to be guided by circum- 
stances. He had no opportunity, however, of doing either ; for he 
had no sooner surmounted the steep ascent, and entered under the 
broken arches of the ruins, than a pistol was presented at his hea'd, 
and a harsh voice commanded him, in the king's name, to surren- 
der himself prisoner. " Mr. Sharpitlaw ! " said Ratcliffe, surprised, 
" is this your honour ! " 

" Is it only you, and be d — d to you?" answered the fiscal, still 
more disappointed — " what made you leave the woman? " 

" She told me she saw Robertson go into the ruins, so I made 
What haste I could to cleek the callant." 

" It's all over now," said Sharpitlaw ; '" we shall see no more of 
him to-night ; but he shall hide himself in a bean-hool, if he re- 



is2 The heart of mid-lothian. 

mains on Scottish ground without my finding him. Call back the 
people, Ratcliffe." / 

Ratcliffe hollowed to the dispersed officers, who willingly obeyed 
the signal ; for probably there was no individual among them wh<( 
't/ould have been much desirous of a rencontre hand to hand, and 
at a distance from his comrades, with such an active and desperate 
fellow as Robertson. 

" And where are the two women ? " said Sharpitlaw. 

" Both made their heels serve them, I suspect," replied Ratcliffe, 
and he hummed the end of the old song — 

" Then hey play up the rin-awa bride, 
For she has taen the gee." 

" One woman," said Sharpitlaw, — for, like all rogues, he was i 
great calumniator of the fair sex,* — " one woman is enough to dark 
the fairest ploy that ever was planned ; and how could I be such 
an ass as to expect to carry through a job that had two in it ? But 
we know how to come by them both, if they are wanted, that's one 
good thing." 

Accordingly, like a defeated general, sad and sulky, he led back 
his discomfited forces to the metropolis, and dismissed them for 
the night. 

The next morning early, he was under the necessity of making 
his report to the sitting magistrate of the day. The gentleman who 
occupied the chair of office on this occasion (for the bailies, Anglicl, 
aldermen, take it by rotation) chanced to be the same by whom Butler 
was committed, a person very generally respected among his fel- 
low-citizens. Something he was of a humourist, and rather defi- 
cient in general education ; but acute, patient, and upright, pos- 
sessed of a fortune acquired by honest industry, which made him 
perfectly independent ; and, in short, very happily qualified to sup- 
port the respectability of the office which he held. 

Mr. Middleburgh had just taken his seat, and was debating in 
an animated manner, with one of his colleagues, the doubtful 
chances of a game at golf which they had played the day before, 
when a letter was delivered to him, addressed " For Bailie Middle- 
burgh ; These : to be forwarded with speed." It contained these 
words : — 

" Sir, 
" I know you to be a sensible and a considerate magistrate, and 
one who, as such, will be content to worship God, though the devil 
bid you. I therefore expect that, notwithstanding the signature of 
this letter acknowledges my share in an action, which, in a proper 
time and place, I would not fear either • to avow or to justify, you 
will not on that account reject what evidence I place before you. 
The clergyman, Butler, is innocent of all but involuntary presence 
at an action which he wanted spirit to approve of, and from which 
he endeavoured, with his best set phrases, to dissuade us. But it 
was not for him that it is my hint to speak. There is a woman in 
your jail, fallen under the edge of a law so cruel, that it has hung 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 153 

by the wall, like unscoured armour, for twenty years, and is now 
brought down and whetted to spill the blood of the most beautiful 
and most innocent creature whom the walls of a prison ever girdled 
in. Her sister knows of her innocence, as she communicated to 
her that she was betrayed by a villain. — O that high Heaven 

' Would put in every honest hand a whip, 

To scourge me such a villain through the world! ' 

" I write distractedly — But this girl — this Jeanie Deans, is a 
peevish puritan, superstitious and scrupulous after the manner of 
her sect ; and I pray your honour, for so my phrase must go, to 
press upon her, that her sister's life depends upon her testimony. 
But though she should remain silent, do not dare to think that the 
young woman is guilty — far less to permit her execution. Remem- 
ber the death of Wilson was fearfully avenged ; and those yet live 
who can compel you to drink the dregs of your poisoned chalice. — 
I say, remember Porteous, — and say that you had good counsel 
from " One of his Slayers." 

The magistrate read over this extraordinary letter twice or thrice. 
At first he was tempted to throw it aside as the production of a 
madman, so little did " the scraps from play-books," as he termed 
the poetical quotation, resemble the correspondence of a rational 
being. On a re-perusal, however, he thought that, amid its inco- 
herence, he could discover something like a tone of awakened 
passion, though expressed in a manner quaint and unusual. 

" It is a cruelly severe statute," said the magistrate to his as- 
sistant, " and I wish the girl could be taken from under the letter 
of it. A child may have been born, and it may have been con- 
veyed away while the mother was insensible, or it may have 
perished for want of that relief which the poor creature herself — 
helpless, terrified, distracted, despairing, and exhausted — may have 
been unable to afford to it. And yet it is certain, if the woman is 
found- guilty under the statute, execution will follow. The crime 
has been too common, and examples are necessary." 

" But if this other wench," said the city-clerk, " can speak to her 
sister communicating her situation, it will take the case from under 
the statute." , 

" Very true," replied the Bailie ; " and I will walk out one of 
these days to St. Leonard's, and examine the girl myself. I know 
something of their father Deans — an old true-blue Cameronian, 
who would see house and family go to wreck ere he would disgrace 
his testimony by a sinful complying with the defections of the 
times ; and such he will probably uphold the taking an oath before 
a civil magistrate. If they are to go on and flourish with their 
bull-headed obstinacy, the legislature must pass an act to take 
their affirmations, as in the case of Quakers. But surely neither a 
father nor a sister will scruple in a case of this kind. As I said be- 
fore, I will go speak with them myself, when the hurry of this Por- 
teous investigation is somewhat over ; their pride and spirit of. 



*54 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

contradiction will be far less alarmed, than if they were called into 
a court of justice at once." 

" And I suppose Butler is to remain incarcerated ? " said the city- 
clerk. 

" Fpr the present, certainly," said the magistrate. " But I hope 
soon to set him at liberty upon bail." 

"Do you rest upon the testimony of that light-headed letter ? " 
asked the clerk. 

" Not very much," answered the Bailie ; " and yet there is some- 
thing striking about it too — it seems the letter of a man beside 
himself, either from great agitation, or some great sense of 
guilt." 

" Yes,'' said the town-clerk, " it is very like the letter of a mad 
■strolling play-actor, who deserves to be hanged with all the rest of 
his gang, as your honour justly observes." 

" I was not quite so bloodthirsty," continued the magistrate. 
" But to the point. Butler's private character is excellent ; and I 
am given to understand, by some inquiries I have been making 
this morning, that he did actually arrive in town only the day be- 
fore yesterday, so that it was impossible he could have been con- 
cerned in any previous machinations of these unhappy rioters, and 
it is not likely that he should have joined them on a suddenly." 

" There's no saying anent that — zeal catches fire at a slight spark 
as fast as a brunstane match," observed the secretary. "I hae 
tend a minister wad be fair gude-day and fair good-e'en w? ilka 
man in the porochine, and hing just as quiet as a rocket on a stick, 
till ye mentioned the word abjuration oath, or patronage, or siclike, 
and then, whiz, he was off, and up in the air an hundred miles 
beyond common manners, common sense, and common compre- 
hension." 

" I do not understand," answered the burgher-magistrate, " that 
the young man Butler's zeal is of so inflammable a character. But 
I will make farther investigation. What other business is there 
before us ? " 

And they proceeded to minute investigations concerning the 
affair of Porteous's death, and other affairs through which this 
history has no occasion to trace them. 

In the course of their business they were interrupted by an old 
woman of the lower rank, extremely haggard in look, and wretched 
in her appearance, who thrust herself into the council-room. 

"What do you want, gudewife? — Who are you?" said Bailie 
Middleburgh. 

" What do I want ! " replied she, in a sulky tone — " I want my 
bairn, or I want naething frae nane o' ye, for as grand's ye are. 
And she went on muttering to herself with the.wayward spitefulness 
of age — ■" They maun hae lordships and honours, nae doubt— set 
them up, the gutter-bloods ! and deil a gentleman amang them." 
— Then again addressing the sitting magistrate, " Will yeur 
honour gie me back my puir crazy bairn ? — His honour ! — I hae 
ken'd the day when less wad se^d him, the oe of a Campvere 
skipper." 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 155 

" Good woman," said the magistrate to this shrewish supplicant, 
• — " tell us what it is you want, and do not interrupt the court." 

" That's as muckle .as till say, Bark, Bawtie, and be dune wi't ! — 
I tell ye," raising her termagant voice, " I want my bairn ! is na 
that braid Scats ? " 

" Who are you ? — who is your bairn ?" demanded the magistrate. 

" Wha am I ?— wha suld I be, but Meg Murdockson, and wha 
suld my bairn be but Magdalen Murdockson ? — Your guard soldiers, 
and your constables, and your officers, ken us weei eneugh when 
they rive the bits o' duds aff our backs, and take what penny o' 
siller we hae, and harle us to the Correction-house in Leith Wynd, 
and pettle us up wi' bread and water, and siclike sunkete." 

" Who is she ? " said the magistrate, looking round to some of 
his people. 

" Other than a gude ane, sir," said one of the city-officers, shrug- 
ging his shoulders, and smiling. 

" Will ye say sae ? " said the termagant, her eye gleaming with 
impotent fury ; " an I had ye amang the Frigate- Whins, wadna I 
set my ten talents in your wuzzent face for that very word? " and 
she suited the word to the action, by spreading out a set of claws 
resembling those of St. George's dragon on a country sign-post. 

"What does she want here?" said the impatient magistrate — 
" Can she not tell her business, or go away ? " 

" It's my bairn ! — it's Magdalen Murdockson I'm wantin'," an- 
swered the beldame, screaming at the highest pitch of her cracked 
and mistuned voice — " havena I been tefim' ye sae this half-hour ? 
And if you are deaf, what needs ye sit cockit up there, and keep 
folk scraughin' t'ye this gate ? " 

" She wants her daughter, sir," said the same officer whose 
interference had given the hag such offence before — " her daughter, 
who was taken up last night — Madge Wildfire, as they ca' her." 

"Madge Heixfire, as they ca' her!" echoed the beldame; "and 
what business has a blackguard like you to ca' an honest woman's 
bairn out o' her ain name ? " 

" Anfaaiwoman's bairn, Maggie?" answered the peace-officer, 
smiling and shaking his head with an ironical emphasis on the 
adjective, and a calmness calculated to provoke to madness the 
furious old shrew. 

" If I am no honest now, I was honest ance," she replied ; " and 
that's mair than ye can say, ye born and bred thief, that never ken'd 
ither folk's gear frae your ain since the day ye was cleckit. Honest, 
say ye ? — ye pykit your mother's pouch o' twalpennies Scots when 
ye were five years auld, just as she was takin leave o' your father 
at the fit o' the gallows." 

" She has you there, George," said the^ assistants, and there was 
•a general laugh ; for the wit was fitted for the meridian of the place 
where it was uttered. This general applause somewhat gratified 
the passions of the old hag ; the " grim feature " smiled, and even 
laughed — but it was a laugh of bitter scorn. She condescended, 
however, as if appeased by the success of her sally, to explain her 
.business more distinctly, when the magistrate, commanding silence, 



155 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

again desired her either to speak out her errand, or to leave the 
place. 

" Her bairn," she said, " was her bairn, and she came to fetch 
her out of ill haft and waur guiding. If she wasna sae wise as ither 
folk, few ither folk had suffered as muckle as she had dune ; forby 
that she could fend the waur for hersell within the four wa's of a 
jail. She could prove by fifty witnesses, and fifty to that, that her 
daughter had never seen Jock Porteous, alive or dead, since he had 
gien her a loundering wi' his cane, the neger that he was ! for 
driving a dead cat at the provost's wig on the Elector of Hanover's 
birth-day." 

Notwithstanding the wretched appearance and violent demeanour 
of this woman, the magistrate felt the justice of her argument, that 
her child might be as dear to her as to a more fortunate and more 
amiable mother. He proceeded to investigate the circumstances 
which had led to Madge Murdockson's (or Wildfire's) arrest, and 
as it was clearly shown that she had not been engaged in the riot, 
he contented himself with directing that an eye should be kept 
upon her by the police, but that for the present she should be 
allowed to return home with hter mother. During the interval of 
fetching Madge from the jail, the magistrate endeavoured to dis- 
cover whether her mother had been privy to the change of dress 
betwixt that young woman and Robertson. But on this point he 
could obtain no light. She persisted in declaring, that she had 
never seen Robertson since his remarkable escape during service- 
time ; and that, if her daughter had changed clothes with him, it 
must have been during her absence at a hamlet about two miles out 
of town, called Duddingstone, where she could prove that she passed 
that eventful night. And, in fact, one of the town-officers, who had 
been searching for stolen linen at the cottage of a washerwoman in 
that village, gave his evidence, that he had seen Maggie Murdock- 
son there, whose presence had considerably increased his suspicion 
of the house in which she was a visitor, in respect that he consi- 
dered her as a person of no good reputation. 

" I tauld ye sae," said the hag ; " see now what it is to hae a 
character, gude or bad ! — Now, maybe, after a', I could tell ye 
something about Porteous that you council-chamber bodies never 
could find out, for as muckle stir as ye mak." 

" All eyes were turned towards her — all ears were alert. " Speak 
out ! " said the magistrate. 

" It will be for your ain gude," insinuated the town-clerk. 

" Dinna keep the Bailie waiting," urged the assistants. 

She remained doggedly silent for two or three minutes, casting 
around a malignant and sulky glance, that seemed ,to enjoy the 
anxious suspense with which they waited her answer. And then 
she broke forth at once, — " A' that I ken about him is, that he was 
neither soldier nor gentleman, but just a thief and a blackguard, 
like maist o' yoursells, dears — What will ye gie me for that news, 
now ? — He wad hae served the gude toun lang or provost or bailie 
wad hae fund that out, my jo ! " 

While these matters were in discussion, Madge Wildfire entered, 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 157 

and her first exclamation was, " Eh ! see if there isna our aulcl 
ne'er-do-weel deevil's-buckie o' a mither— Hegh, sirs ! but we are a 
hopefu' family, to be twa o' us in the Guard at ance — But there 
were better days wi' us ance — were there na, mither ? " 

Old Maggie's eyes had glistened with something like an expres- 
sion of pleasure when she saw her daughter set at liberty. But 
either her natural affection, like that of the tigress, could not be 
displayed without a strain of ferocity, or there was something in 
the ideas which Madge's speech awakened, that again stirred her 
cross and savage temper. " What signifies what we were, ye 
street-raking limmer ! " she exclaimed, pushing her daughter be- 
fore her to the door, with no gentle degree of violence. " l'se tell 
thee what thou is now — thou's a crazed hellicat Bess o' Bedlam, 
that sail taste naething but bread and water for a fortnight, to serve 
ye for the plague ye hae gien me— and ower gude for ye, ye idle 
taupie ! " 

Madge, however, escaped from her mother at the door, ran back 
to the foot of the table, dropped a very low and fantastic curtsey to 
the judge, and said, with a giggling laugh, — " Our minnie's sair 
mis-set, after her ordinar, sir — She'll hae had some quarrel wi' her 
auld gudeman — that's Satan, ye ken, sirs." This explanatory note 
she gave in a low confidential tone, and the spectators of that cre- 
dulous generation did not hear it without an involuntary shudder. 
" The gudeman and her disna aye gree weel, and then I maun pay 
the piper ; but my back's broad eneugh to heart a' — an' if she hae 
nae havings, that's nae reason why wiser folk should na hae some." 
Here another deep curtsey, when the ungracious voice of her 
mother was heard. 

" Madge, ye limmer ! If I come to fetch ye 1" 

" Hear till her," said Madge. " But I'll wun out a gliff the nicht 
for a' that, to dance in the moonlicht, when her and the gudeman 
will be whirrying through the blue lift on a broom-shank, to see 
Jean Jap, that they hae putten intill the Kirkcaldy tolbooth — ay, 
they will hae a merry sail ower Inchkeith, and ower a' the bits o' 
bonny waves that are poppling and plashing against the rocks in 
the gowden glimmer o' the moon, ye ken. — I'm coming, mother — 
I'm coming," she concluded, on hearing a scuffle at the door betwixt 
the beldam and the officers, who were endeavouring to prevent her 
re-entrance. Madge then waved her hand wildly towards the ceil- 
ing, and sung, at the topmost pitch of her voice, — 

" Up in the air, on my bonny grey mare, 
And I see, and I see, and I see her yet." 

And with a hop, skip, and jump, sprung out of the room, as the 
witches of Macbeth used, in less refined days, to seem to fly up- 
wards from the stage. 

Some weeks intervened before Mr. Middleburgh, agreeably to his 
benevolent resolution, found an opportunity of taking a walk to- 
wards St. Leonard's, in order to discover whether it might be pos- 
sible to obtain the evidence hinted at in the anonymous letter 
respecting Effie Deans. 



158 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

In fact, the anxious perquisitions made to discover the murderers 
of Porteous occupied the attention of all concerned with the admin- 
istration of justice. 

In the course of these inquiries, two circumstances happened- 
material to our story. Butler, after a close investigation of his con- 
duct, was declared innocent of accession to the death of Porteous ; 
but, as having been present during the whole transaction, was 
obliged to find bail not to quit his usual residence at Libberton; that 
he might appear as a witness when called upon. The other inci- 
dent regarded the disappearance of Madge Wildfire and her mother 
from Edinburgh. When they were sought, with the purpose of 
subjecting them to some further interrogatories, it was discovered 
by Mr. Sharpitlaw that they had eluded the observation of the 
police, and left the city so soon as dismissed from the council- 
chamber. No efforts eould trace the place of their retreat. 

In the meanwhile the excessive indignation of the Council of 
Regency, at the slight put upon their authority by the murder of 
Porteous, had dictated measures, in which their own extreme desire- 
of detecting the actors in that conspiracy were consulted; in pre* 
ference to the temper of the people and the character of their 
churchmen. An act of parliament was hastily passed, offering two 
hundred pounds reward to those who should inform against any 
person concerned in the deed, and the penalty of death, by a very 
unusual and severe enactment,, was denounced against those who 
should harbour the guilty. But what was chiefly accounted excep- 
tionable, was a clause, appointing the act to be read in churches by 
the officiating clergyman, on the first Sunday of every month, for a 
certain period, immediately before the sermon. The ministers who 
should refuse to comply with this injunction were declared, for the 
first offence, incapable of sitting or voting in any church judicature,, 
and for the second, incapable of holding any ecclesiastical prefer- 
ment in Scotland. 

This last order united in a common cause those who might pri- 
vately rejoice in Porteous ? s death, though they did not vindicate the 
manner of it, with- the more scrupulous presbyterians, who held that 
even the pronouncing the name of the " Lords Spiritual" in a 
Scottish pulpit was, quodummodb, an acknowledgment of prelacy, 
and that the injunction of the legislature was an interference of the 
civil government with theyw dvviwum of presbytery, since- to the 
General Assembly alone, as representing the invisible head 1 of the 
kirk, belonged the sole and exclusive right of regulating whatever 
pertained to public worship. Very many also, of different political 
or religious sentiments, and therefore not much moved by these con- 
siderations, though they saw, in so violent an act of parliament, a 
mare vindictive spirit than became the legislature of a great 
country, and something like an attempt to trample upon the rights' 
and independence of Scotland. The various steps adopted for- 
punishing the city of Edinburgh, by taking away her charter and 
liberties; for what a violent and overmastering mob had done 
within her walls-, were resented by many, who thought a pretext was 
too hastily taken for degrading the ancient metropolis- of Sootlanct- 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 159 

In short, there was much heart-burning, discontent, and disaffec- 
tion, occasioned by these ill-considered measures.* 

Amidst these heats and dissensions, the trial of Effie Deans, after 
she had been many weeks imprisoned, was at length about to be 
brought forward, and Mr. Middleburgh found leisure to inquire into 
the evidence concerning her. For this purpose, he chose a fine day 
for his walk, towards her father's house. 

The excursion into the country was somewhat distant, in the 
opinion, of a burgess, of those days, although many of the present 
inhabit suburban villas, considerably beyond the spot to which we 
allude. Three-quarters of an hour's walk, however, even at a pace 
of magisterial gravity,, conducted our benevolent office-bearer to 
the Crags of St. Leonard's, and the humble mansion of David 
Deans. 

The old man was seated on the deas, or turf-seat, at the end of 
his cottage, busied in mending his cart-harness with his own hands ; 
for in those days any sort of labour which required a little more 
skill than usual, fell to the share of the goodman himself,, and that 
even when he was well to pass in the world. With stern and 
austere gravity he persevered in his task, after having just raised 
his head to notice the advance of the stranger. It would have been 
impossible to have discovered,, from his countenance and manner, 
the internal feelings of agony with which he contended. Mr. Mid- 
dleburgh waited an instant, expecting Deans would in some measure 
acknowledge his presence, and. lead into conversation ; but, as he 
seemed determined to remain silent, he was- himself obliged to: 
speak first. 

"My name is Middleburgh — Mr. James Middleburgh, one of 
the present magistrates of the city of Edinburgh." 

" It may be sae," answered Deans laconically, and without inter- 
rupting his labour. 

" You must understand," he continued, " that the duty of a magis- 
trate is sometimes an unpleasant one." 

" It may be sae," replied David* ; " I hae naething to say in the 
contrair;" and he was again doggedly silent. 

" You/must be aware," pursued the magistrate, "that persons in 
my situation are often obliged to make painful and disagreeable in- 
quiries of individuals, merely because it is their bounden duty." 
« " It may be sae," again replied Deans ; " I hae naething to say 
anent it, either the tae way or the t'other. But I do ken there was 
ance in a day a just and God-fearing magistracy in yon toun o' Edin- 
burgh, that did not bear the sword in vain, but were a terror to evil- 
doers,, and a praise to such as kept the path. In the glorious days of 
auld worthy faithfu' Provost Dick,* when there was atrue and faithfu? 
General Assembly of the Kirk, walking hand in hand with, the real 
noble Scottish-hearted barons, and with the magistrates of this and 
other touns, gentles, burgesses, and commons of all ranks, seeing 
with, one eye, hearing with one ear, and upholding the ark with 
their united strength — And then folk might see men deliver up their 
silver to the state's use, as if it had been as muekle sclate stanes. 
My father saw them toom- the sacks of dollars out o' Erovost Dick's 



160 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

window intill the carts that carried them to the army at Dunse 
Law ; and if ye winna believe his testimony, there is the window 
itsell still standing in the Luckenbooths— I think it's a claith-mer- 
chant's booth the day* — at the aim stanchells, five doors abune 
Gossford's Close. — But now we haena sic spirit amang us ; we think 
mair about the warst wally-draigle in our ain byre, than about the 
blessing which the angel of the covenant gave to the Patriarch even 
at Peniel and Mahanaim, or the binding obligation of our national 
vows ; and we wad rather gie a pund Scots to buy an unguent to 
clear our auld rannell-trees and our beds o' the English bugs as 
they ca' them, than we wad gie a plack to rid the hand of the swarm 
of Arminian caterpillars, Socinian pismires, and deistical Miss 
Katies, that have ascended out of the bottomless pit, to plague this 
perverse, insidious, and lukewarm generation." 

It happened to Davie Deans on this occasion, as it has done to 
many other habitual orators ; when once he became embarked on 
his favourite subject, the stream of his own enthusiasm carried him 
forward in spite of his mental distress, while his well-exercised 
memory supplied him amply with all the types and tropes of rhe- 
toric peculiar to his sect and cause. 

Mr. Middleburgh contented himself with answering — " All this 
may be very true, my friend ; but, as you said just now, I have 
nothing to say to it at present, either one way or other. — You have 
two daughters, I think, Mr. Deans ? " 

The old man winced, as one whose smarting sore is suddenly 
galled ; but instantly composed himself, resumed the work which, 
in the heat of his declamation, he had laid down, and answered 
with sullen resolution, " Ae daughter, sir — only ane." 

" I understand you," said Mr. Middleburgh ; "you have only one 
daughter here at home with you — but this unfortunate girl who is a 
prisoner — she is, I think, your youngest daughter ? " 

The presbyterian sternly raised his eyes. " After the world, and 
according to the flesh, she is my daughter ; but when she became a 
child of Belial and a company-keeper, and a trader in guilt and 
iniquity, she ceased to be a bairn of mine." 

"Alas !" Mr. Deans," said Middleburgh, sitting down by him, 
and endeavouring to take his hand, which the old man proudly 
withdrew, " we are ourselves all sinners ; and the errors of our off- 
spring, as they ought not to surprise us, being the portion which 
they derive of a common portion of corruption inherited through 
us, so they do not entitle us to cast them off because they have lost 
themselves." 

" Sir," said Deans, impatiently, " I ken a' that as weel as— I mean 
to say," he resumed, checking the irritation he felt at being 
schooled, — a discipline of the mind, which those most ready to 
bestow it on others, do themselves most reluctantly submit to 
receive — " I mean to say, that what ye observe may be just and rea- 
sonable — But I hae nae freedom to enter into my ain private affairs 
wi' strangers — And now, in this great national emergency, when 
there's the Porteous Act has come doun frae London, that is a deeper 
blow to this poor sinfu' kingdom and suffering kirk, than ony that 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 161 

has been heard of since the foul and fatal Test — at a time like 
this " 

" But, goodman," interrupted Mr. Middleburgh, " you most think 
of your own household first, or else you are worse even than the 
infidels." 

"I tell ye, Bailie Middleburgh," retorted Davie Deans, " if ye be 
a bailie, as there is little honour in being ane in these evil days — 
I tell ye, I heard the gracious Saunders Peden — I wotna whan it 
was ; but it was in killing time, when the plowers were drawing 
alang their furrows on the back of the Kirk of Scotland — I heard 
him tell his hearers, gude and waled Christians they were too, that 
some o' them wad greet mair for a bit drowned calf or stirk, than 
for a' the defections and oppressions of the day ; and that they were 
some o' them thinking o' ae thing, some o' anither, and there was 
Lady Hundleslope thinking o' greeting Jock at the fireside ! And 
the lady confessed in my hearing, that a drow of anxiety had come 
ower her for her son that she had left at hame weak of a decay* — 
And what wad he hae said of me, if I had ceased to think of the 
gude cause for a cast-away — a — It kills me to think of what she 
is!" 

" But the life of your child, goodman — think of that — if her life 
could be saved," said Middleburgh. 

" Her life ! " exclaimed David — " I wadna gie ane o' my grey hairs 
for her life, if her gude name be gane — And yet," said he, relenting 
and retracting as he spoke, " I wad make the niffer, Mr. Middle- 
burgh — I wad gie a' these grey hairs that she has brought to shame 
and sorrow — I wad gie the auld head they grow on for her life, and 
that she might hae time to amend and return, for what hae the 
wicked beyond the breath of their nosthrils ? — But I'll never see her 
mair. — No ! — that — that I am determined in — 111 never see her 
mair ! " His lips continued to move for aminute after his voiceceased 
to be heard, as if he were repeating the same vow internally. 

" Well, sir," said Mr. Middleburgh, "I speak to you as a man of 
sense ; if you would save your daughter's life, you must use human 
means." 

" I understand what you mean ; but Mr. Novit, who is the pro- 
curator and doer of an honourable person, the Laird of Dumbie- 
dikes, is to do what carnal wisdom can do for her under the circum- 
stances. Mysell am not clear to trinquet and traffic wi' courts o' 
justice, as they are now constituted; I have a tenderness and 
scruple in my mind anent them." 

" That is to say," said Middleburgh, " that you are a Camero- 
nian, and do not acknowledge the authority of our courts of judica- 
ture, or present government ? " 

" Sir, under your favour," replied David, who was too proud of 
his own polemical knowledge, to call himself the follower of any 
one, " ye tak me up before I fall doun. I canna see why I suld be 
termed a Cameronian, especially now that ye hae given the name 
of that famous and savoury sufferer, not only until a regimental 
band of souldiers, whereof I am told many can now curse, swear, 
and use profane language, as fast as ever Richard Cameron could 

it 



l6a THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

preach or pray ; but also because ye have, in as far as it is in your 
power, rendered that martyr's name vain and contemptible, by 
pipes, drums, and fifes, playing the vain carnal spring, called the 
Cameronian Rant, which too many professors of religion dance to 
— a practice maist unbecoming a professor to dance to any tune 
whatsoever, more especially promiscuously, that is, with the female 
sex.* A brutish fashion it is, whilk is the beginning of defection 
with many, as I may hae as muckle cause as maist folk to testify." 
"Well, but, Mr. Deans," replied Mr. Middleburgh, "I only meant 
to say that you were a Cameronian, or MacMillanite, one of the 
society people, in short, who think it inconsistent to take oaths 
under a government where the Covenant is not ratified." 

" Sir," replied the controversialist, who forgot even his present 
distress in such discussions as these, " you cannot fickle me sae 
easily as you do opine. I am not a MacMillanite, or a Russelite, 
or a Hamiltonian, or a Harleyite, or a Howdenite* — I will be led 
by the nose by none — I take my name as a Christian from no 
vessel of clay. I have my own principles and practice to answer 
for, and am an humble pleader for the gude auld cause in a legal 
way." 

" That is to say, Mr. Deans," said Middleburgh, " that you are 
a Deanite, and have opinions peculiar to yourself." 

" It may please you to say sae," said David Deans ; " but I have 
maintained my testimony before as great folk, and in sharper 
times ; and though I will neither exalt myself nor pull down others, 
I wish every man and woman in this land had kept the true testi- 
mony, and the middle and straight path, as it were, on the ridge 
of a hill, where wind and water shears, avoiding right-hand snares 
and extremes, and left-hand way-slidings, as weel as Johnny Dodds 
of Farthing's Acre, and ae man mair that shall be nameless." 

" I suppose," replied the magistrate, "that is as much as to say, 
that Johnny Dodds of Farthing's Acre, and David Deans of St. 
Leonard's, constitute the only members of the true, real, unso- 
phisticated Kirk of Scotland ? " 

" God forbid that I suld mak sic a vain-glorious speech, when 
there are sae mony professing Christians ! " answered David ; " but 
this I maun say, that all men act according to their gifts and their 

grace, sae that it is nae marvel that " 

" This is all very fine," interrupted Mr. Middleburgh ; but I 
have no time to spend in hearing it. The matter in hand is this — 
I have directed a citation to be lodged in your daughter's hands — 
If she appears on the day of trial and gives evidence, there is 
reason to hope she may save her sister's life — if, from any con- 
strained scruples about the legality of her performing the office of 
an affectionate sister and a good subject, by appearing in a court 
held under the authority of the law and government, you become 
the means of deterring her from the discharge of this duty, I must 
say, though the truth may sound harsh in your ears, that you, who 
gave life to this unhappy girl, will become the means of her losing 
it by a premature and violent death." 

So saying, Mr. Middleburgh turned to leave him. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 163 

" Bide awee — bide awee, Mr. Middleburgh," said Deans, in great 
perplexity and distress of mind ; but the Bailie, who was probably 
sensible that protracted discussion might diminish the effect of. his 
best and most forcible argument, took a hasty leave, and declined 
entering further into the controversy. 

Deans sunk down upon his seat, stunned with a variety of con- 
flicting emotions. It had been a great source of controversy 
among those holding his opinions in religious matters, how far the 
government which succeeded the«Revolution could be, without sin, 
acknowledged by true presbyterians, seeing that it did not recog- 
nize the great national testimony of the Solemn League and Cove- 
nant ? And latterly, those agreeing in this general doctrine, and 
assuming the sounding title of the anti-popish, anti-prelatic, anti- 
erastian, anti-sectarian, true presbyterian remnant, were divided 
into many petty sects among themselves, even as to the extent of 
submission to the existing laws and rulers, which constituted such 
an acknowledgment as amounted to sin. 

At a very stormy and tumultuous meeting, held in 1682, to dis- 
cuss these important and delicate points, the testimonies of the 
faithful few were found utterly inconsistent with each other.* The 
place where this conference took place was remarkably well adapted 
for such an assembly. It was a wild and very sequestered dell in 
Tweeddale, surrounded by high hills, and far remote from human 
habitation. A small river, or rather a mountain torrent, called the 
Talla, breaks down the glen with great fury, dashing successively 
over a number of small cascades, which has procured the spot the 
name of Talla-Linns. Here the leaders among the scattered 
adherents to the Covenant, men who, in their banishment from 
human society, and in the recollection of the severities to which 
they had been exposed, had become at once sullen in their tem- 
pers, and fantastic in their religious opinions, met with arms in 
their hands, and by the side of the torrent discussed, with a turbu- 
lence which the noise of the stream could not drown, points of 
controversy as empty and unsubstantial as its foam. 

It was the fixed judgment of most of the meeting, that all pay- 
ment of cess or tribute to the existing government was utterly un- 
lawful, and a sacrificing to idols. About other impositions and 
degrees of submission there were various opinions ; and perhaps 
it is the best illustration of the spirit of those military fathers of 
the church to say, that while all allowed it was impious to pay 
the cess employed for maintaining the standing army and militia, 
there was a fierce controversy on the lawfulness of paying the 
duties levied at ports and bridges, for maintaining roads and other 
necessary purposes ; and there were some who, repugnant to these 
imposts for turnpikes and pontages, were nevertheless free in 
conscience to make payment of the usual freight at public ferries, 
- and that a person of exceeding and punctilious zeal, James Russel, 
one of the slayers of the Archbishop of St. Andrews, had given 
his testimony with great warmth even against this last faint shade 
of subjection to constituted authority. This ardent and enlightened 
person and his followers had also great scruples about the lawful- 

1. 2 



164 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

ness of bestowing the ordinary names upon the. days of the week 
and the months of the year, which savoured in their nostrils so 
strongly of paganism, that at length they arrived at the conclusion 
that they who owned such names as Monday, Tuesday, January, 
February, and so forth, " served themselves heirs to the same, if 
not greater punishment, than had been denounced against the ido- 
laters of old." 

David Deans had been present on this memorable occasion, 
although too young to be a speaker among the polemical com- 
batants. His brain, however, had been thoroughly heated by the 
noise, clamour, and metaphysical ingenuity of the discussion, and 
it was a controversy to which his mind had often returned ; and 
though he carefully disguised his vacillation from others, and per- 
haps from himself, he had never been able to come to any precise 
line of decision on the subject. In fact, his natural sense had 
acted as a counterpoise to his controversial zeal. He was by no 
means pleased with the quiet and indifferent manner in which 
King William's government slurred over the errors of the times, 
when, far from restoring the presbyterian kirk to its former supre- 
macy, they passed an act of oblivion even to those who had been 
its persecutors, and bestowed on many of them titles, favours, and 
employments. When, in the first General Assembly which suc- 
ceeded the Revolution, an overture was made for the revival of the 
League and Covenant, it was with horror that Douce David heard 
the proposal eluded by the men of carnal wit and policy, as he 
called them, as being inapplicable to the present times, and not 
falling under the modern model of the church. The reign of 
Queen Anne had increased his conviction, that the Revolution 
government was not one of the true presbyterian complexion. But 
then, more sensible than the bigots of his sect, he did not con- 
found the moderation and tolerance of these two reigns with the 
active tyranny and oppression exercised in those of Charles II. and 
James II. The presbyterian form of religion, though deprived of 
the weight formerly attached to its sentences of excommunication, 
and compelled to tolerate the co-existence of episcopacy, and of 
sects of various descriptions, was still the National Church ; and 
though the glory of the second temple was far inferior to that 
which had flourished from 1639 till the battle of Dunbar, still it 
was a structure that, wanting the strength and the terrors, retained 
at least the form and symmetry, of the original model. Then came 
the insurrection in 1715, and David Deans's horror for the revival of 
the popish and prelatical faction reconciled him greatly to the 
government of King George, although he grieved that that monarch 
might be suspected of a leaning unto Erastianism. In short, 
moved by so many different considerations, he had shifted his 
ground at different times concerning the degree of freedom which 
he felt in adopting any act of immediate acknowledgment or sub- 
mission to the present government, which, however mild and 
paternal, was still uncovenanted ; and now he felt himself called 
up^on by the most powerful motive conceivable, to authorize his 
daughter's giving testimony in a court of justice, which all who 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 165 

have been since called Cameronians accounted a step of lament- 
able and direct defection. The voice of nature, however, exclaimed 
loud in his bosom against the dictates of fanaticism ; and his ima- 
gination, fertile in the solution of polemical difficulties, devised an 
expedient for extricating himself from the fearful dilemma, in which 
he saw, on the one side, a falling off from principle, and, on the 
other, a scene from which a father's thoughts could not but turn in 
shuddering horror. 

" I have been constant and unchanged in my testimony," said 
David Deans ; " but then who has said it of me, that I have judged 
my neighbour over closely, because he hath had more freedom in 
his walk than I have found in mine ? I never was a separatist, 
nor for quarreling with tender souls about mint, cummin, or other 
the lesser tithes. My daughter Jean may have a light in this sub- 
ject that is hid frae my auld een — it is laid on her conscience, and 
not on mine — If she hath freedom to gang before this judicatory, 
and hold up her hand for this poor cast-away, surely I will not say 

she steppeth over her bounds ; and if not " He paused in his 

mental argument, while a pang of unutterable anguish convulsed 
his features, yet, shaking it off, he firmly resumed the strain of his 
reasoning — " And if not — God forbid that she should go into 
defection at bidding of mine ! I wunna fret the tender conscience 
of one bairn — no, not to save the life of the other." 

A Roman would have devoted his daughter to death from dif- 
ferent feelings and motives, but not upon a more heroic principle 
of duty. 



CHAPTER XIX. 



To man, in this his trial state, 

The privilege is given, 
When tost by tides of human fate, 

To anchor fast on heaven. 

Watts' Hymns. 

It was with a firm step that Deans sought his daughter's apart- 
ment, determined to leave her to the light of her own conscience 
in the dubious point of casuistry in which he supposed her to be 
placed. 

The little room had been the sleeping apartment of both sisters, 
and there still stood there a small occasional bed which had been 
made for Effie's accommodation, when, complaining of illness, she 
had declined to share, as in happier times, her sister's pillow. The 
eyes of Deans rested involuntarily, on entering the room, upon 
this little couch, with its dark green coarse curtains, and the ideas 
connected with it rose so thick upon his soul as almost to incapaci- 
tate him from opening his errand to his daughter. Her occupa- 
tion broke the ice. He found her gazing on a slip of paper, which 
contained a citation to her to appear as a witness upon her sister's 
trial in behalf Of the accused. For the worthy magistrate, deter- 



i66 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

mined to omit no chance of doing Effie justice, and to leave her 
sister no apology for not giving the evidence which she was sup- 
posed to possess, had caused the ordinary citation, or subpana, of 
the Scottish criminal court, to be served upon her by an officer 
during his conference with David. 

This precaution was so far favourable to Deans, that it saved him 
the pain of entering upon a formal explanation with his daughter ; 
he only said, with a hollow and tremulous voice, " I perceive ye are 
aware of the matter." 

" O father, we are cruelly sted between God's laws and man's laws 
— What shall we do ? — What can we do ? " 

Jeanie, it must be observed, had no hesitation whatever about 
the mere act of appearing in a court of justice. She might have 
heard the point discussed by -her father more than once ; but we 
have already noticed, that she was accustomed to listen with rever- 
ence to much which she was incapable of understanding, and that 
subtle arguments of casuistry found her a patient but unedified 
hearer. Upon receiving the citation, therefore, her thoughts did not 
turn upon the chimerical scruples which alarmed her father's mind, 
but to the language which had been held to her by the stranger at 
Muschat's Cairn. In a word, she never doubted but she was to be 
dragged forward into the court of justice, in order to place her in 
the cruel position of either sacrificing her sister by telling the truth, 
or committing perjury in order to save her life. . And so strongly 
did her thoughts run in this channel, that she applied her father's 
words, " Ye are aware of the matter," to his acquaintance with the 
advice that had been so fearfully enforced upon her. She looked 
up with anxious surprise, not unmingled with a cast of horror, which 
his next words, as she interpreted, and applied them, were not 
qualified to remove. 

" Daughter," said David, " it has ever been my mind, that in 
things of ane doubtful and controversial nature, ilk Christian's 
conscience suld be his ain guide — Wherefore descend into yourself, 
try your ain mind with sufficiency of soul exercise, and as you sali 
finally find yourself clear to do in this matter — even so be it." 

" But, father," said Jeanie, whose mind revolted at the construc- 
tion which she naturally put upon his language, " can this — THIS 
be a doubtful or controversial matter? — Mind, father, the ninth 
command — ' Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neigh- 
bour.'" 

David Deans paused ; for, still applying her' speech to his pre- 
conceived difficulties, it seemed to him as if she, a woman, and a 
sister, was scarce entitled to be scrupulous upon this occasion, 
where he, a man, exercised in the testimonies of that testifying 
period, had given indirect countenance to her following what must 
have been the natural dictates of her own feelings. But he kept firm 
his purpose, until his eyes involuntarily rested upon the little settle- 
bed, and recalled the form of the child of his old age, 'as she sate 
upon it, pale, emaciated, and broken-hearted. His mind, as the 
picture arose before him, involuntarily conceived, and his tongue 
involuntarily uttered— but in a tone how different from his usual 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 167 

dogmatical precision !— arguments for the course of conduct likely 
to ensure his child's safety. 

" Daughter," he said, " I did not say that your path was free from 
stumbling — and, questionless, this act may be in the opinion of 
sime a transgression, since he who beareth witness unlawfully and 
against his conscience, doth in some sort bear false witness against 
his neighbour. Yet in matters of compliance, the guilt lieth not in 
the compliance sae muckle, as in the mind and conscience of him 
that doth comply ; and, therefore, although my testimony hath not 
been spared upon public defections, I haena felt freedom to sepa- 
rate mysell from the communion of many who have been clear to 
hear those ministers who have taken the fatal indulgence because 
they might get good of them, though I could not." 

When David had proceeded thus far, his conscience reproved 
hini, that he might be indirectly undermining the purity of his 
daighter's faith, and smoothing the way for a falling off from strict- 
ness of principle. He, therefore, suddenly stopped, and changed 
his .one : — "Jeanie, I perceive that our vile affections, — so I call 
then in respect of doing the will of our Father, — cling too heavily 
to me in this hour of trying sorrow, to permit me to keep sight of my 
ain duty, or to airt you to yours. I will speak nae mair anent this 
over-trying matter. — Jeanie, if ye can, wi' God and gude conscience, 
speak in favour of this puir unhappy" — (here his voice faltered) — 
" She is your sister in the flesh — worthless and castaway as she is, 
she is the daughter of a saint in heaven, that was a mother to you, 
Jeanie, in place of your ain — but if ye arena free in conscience to 
speak for her in the court of judicature, follow your conscience, 
Jeanie, and let God's will be done." After this adjuration he left the 
apartment, and his daughter remained in a state of great distress 
and perplexity. 

It would have been no small addition to the sorrows of David 
Deans, even in this extremity of suffering, had he known that his 
daughter was applying the casuistical arguments which he had been 
using, not in the sense of a permission to follow her own opinion on 
a dubious and disputed point of controversy, but rather as an en- 
couragement to transgress one of those divine commandments which 
Christians of all sects and denominations unite in holding most 
sacred. 

" Can this be ? " said Jeanie, as the door closed on her father — 
" Can these be his words that I have heard, or has the Enemy taken 
his voice and features to give weight unto the counsel which causeth 
to perish ? — A sister's life, and a father pointing out how to save it ! 
— O God deliver me ! — this is a fearfu' temptation." 

Roaming from thought to thought, she at one time imagined her 
father understood the ninth-commandment literally, as prohibiting 
false witness against our neighbour, without extending the denun- 
ciation against falsehood uttered in favour of the criminal. But her 
clear and unsophisticated power of discriminating between good 
and evil, instantly rejected an interpretation so limited, and so un- 
worthy of the Author of the la\v. She remained in a state of the 
most agitating terror and uncertainty — afraid to communicate her 



168 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

thoughts freely to her father, lest she should draw forth an opinion 
with which she could not comply, — wrung with distress on her 
sister's account, rendered the more acute by reflecting that the 
means of saving her were in her power, but were such as her con- 
science prohibited her from using, — tossed, in short, like a vessd 
in an open roadstead during a storm, and, like that vessel, restiig 
on one only sure cable and anchor, — faith in Providence, and a 
resolution to discharge her duty. / 

Butler's affection and strong sense of religion would have been 
her principal support in these distressing circumstances, but he was 
still under restraint, which did not permit him to come to; St. 
Leonard's Crags ; and her distresses were of a nature which, pith 
her indifferent habits of scholarship, she found it impossible t(j ex- 
press in writing. She was therefore compelled to trust for guidance 
to her own unassisted sense of what was right or wrong. 

It was not the least of Jeanie's distresses, that, although she hoped 
and believed her sister to be innocent, she had not the meani of 
receiving that assurance from her own mouth. 

The double-dealing of Ratcliffe in the matter of Robertson had 
not prevented his being rewarded, as double-dealers frequently lave 
been, with favour and preferment. Sharpitlaw, who found in him 
something of a kindred genius, had been intercessor in his behalf 
with the magistrates, and the circumstance of his having voluntarily 
remained in the prison, when the doors were forced by the mot, 
would have made it a hard measure to take the life which he ha^ 
such easy means of saving. He received a full pardon ; and sool 
afterwards, James Ratcliffe, the greatest thief and house-breaker ii 
Scotland, jvas, upon the faith, perhaps, of an ancient proverb, 
selected as a person to be intrusted with the custody of other de- 
linquents. 

When Ratcliffe was thus placed in a confidential situation, he was 
repeatedly applied to by the sapient Saddletree and others, who 
took some interest in the Deans' family, to procure an interview 
between the sisters ; but the magistrates, who were extremely anxious 
for the apprehension of Robertson, had given strict orders to the 
contrary, hoping that, by keeping them separate, they might, from 
the one or the other, extract some information respecting that fugi- 
tive. On this subject Jeanie had nothing to tell them. She in- 
formed Mr. Middleburgh, that she knew nothing of Robertson, 
except having met him that night by appointment to give her 
some advice respecting her sister's concern, the purport of which, 
she said, was betwixt God and her conscience. Of his motions, 
purposes, or plans, past, present, or future, she knew nothing, and 
so had nothing to communicate. 

Effie was equally silent, though from a different cause. It was 
in vain that they offered a commutation and alleviation of her 
punishment, and even a free pardon, if she would confess what she 
knew of her lover. She answered only with tears ; unless, when at 
times driven into pettish sulkiness by the persecution of the interro- 
gators, she made them abrupt and disrespectful answers. 

At length, after her trial had been delayed for many weeks, in 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 169 

hopes she might be induced to speak out on a subject infinitely- 
more interesting to the magistracy than her own guilt or innocence, 
their patience was worn out, and even Mr. Middleburgh finding no 
ear lent to further intercession in her behalf, the day was fixed for 
the trial to proceed. 

It was now, and not sooner, that Sharpitlaw, recollecting his 
promise to Effie Deans, or rather being dinned into compliance by 
the unceasing remonstrances of Mrs. Saddletree, who was his next- 
door neighbour, and who declared it was heathen cruelty to keep 
twa broken-hearted creatures separate, issued the important man- 
date, permitting them to see each other. 

On the evening which preceded the eventful day of trial, Jeanie 
was permitted to see her sister — an awful interview, and occurring 
at a most distressing crisis. This, however, formed a part of the 
bitter cup which she was doomed to drink, to atone for crimes and 
follies to which she had no accession ; and at twelve o'clock noon, 
being the time appointed for admission to the jail, she went to 
meet, for the first time for several months, her guilty, erring, and 
most miserable sister, in that abode of guilt, error, and utter misery. 



CHAPTER XX. 



Sweet sister, let me live ! 

What sin you do to save a brother's life, 
Nature dispenses with the deed so far, 
That it becomes a virtue. 

Measure for Measure. 

Jeanie Deans was admitted into the jail by Ratcliffe. This 
fellow, as void of shame as of honesty, as he opened the now trebly 
secured door, asked her, with a leer which made her shudder, 
" whether she remembered him ? " 

A half-pronounced and timid " No," was her answer. 

" What ! not remember moonlight, -and Muschat's Cairn, and 
Rob and Rat ?". said he, with the same sneer ; — " Your memory 
needs redding up, my jo." 

If Jeanie's distresses had admitted of aggravation, it must have 
been to find her sister under the charge of such a profligate as this 
man. He was not, indeed, without something of good to balance 
so much that was evil in his character and habits. In his misde- 
meanours he had never been bloodthirsty or cruel; and in his 
present occupation, he had shown himself, in a certain degree, 
accessible to touches of humanity. But these good qualities were 
unknown to Jeanie, who, remembering the scene at Muschat's 
Cairn, could scarce find voice to acquaint him, that she had an order 
from Bailie Middleburgh, permitting her to see her sister. 

" I ken that fu' weel, my bonny doo ; mair by token, I have a 
special charge to stay in the ward with you a' the time ye are the- 
gither." 

" Must that be sae?" asked Jeanie, with an imploring voice. 



i 7 o THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" Hout, ay, hinny," replied the turnkey ; " and what the waurwill 
you and your tittie be of Jim Ratcliffe hearing what ye hae to say 
to ilk ither ? — Deil a word ye'll say that will gar him ken your kittle 
sex better than he kens them already ; and another thing is, that if 
ye dinna speak o' breaking the Tolbooth, deil a word will I tell ower, 
either to do ye good or ill." 

Thus saying, Ratcliffe marshalled her the way to the apartment 
where Effie was confined. 

' Shame, fear, and grief, had contended for mastery in the poor 
prisoner's bosom during the whole morning, while she had looked 
forward to this meeting ; but when the door opened, all gave way 
to a confused and strange feeling that had a tinge of joy in it, as, 
throwing herself on her sister's neck, she ejaculated, " My dear 
Jeanie ! — -my dear Jeanie ! it's lang since I hae seen ye." Jeanie 
returned the embrace with an earnestness that partook almost of 
rapture, but it was only a flitting emotion, like a sunbeam unex- 
pectedly penetrating betwixt the clouds of a tempest, and obscured 
almost as soon as visible. The sisters walked together to the side 
of the pallet bed, and sat down side by side, took hold of each 
other's hands, and looked each other in the face, but without speak- 
ing a word. In this posture they remained for a minute, while the 
gleam of joy gradually faded from their features, and gave way to 
the most intense expression, first of melancholy, and then of agony, 
till, throwing themselves again into each other's arms, they, to use 
the language of Scripture, lifted up their voices and wept bitterly. 

Even the hard-hearted turnkey, who had spent his life in scenes 
calculated to stifle both conscience and feeling, could not witness 
this scene without a touch of human sympathy. It was shown in 
a trifling action', but which had more delicacy in it than seemed to 
belong to Ratcliffe's character and station. The unglazed window 
of the miserable chamber was open, and the beams of a bright 
sun fell right upon the bed where the sufferers were seated. With 
a gentleness that had something of reverence in it, Ratcliffe partly 
closed the shutter, and seemed thus to throw a veil over a scene so 
sorrowful. 

"Ye are ill, Effie," were the first words Jeanie could utter ; "ye 
are very ill." 

" O, what wad I gie to be ten times waur, Jeanie ! " was the 
reply — " what wad I gie to be cauld deid afore the ten o'clock bell 
the morn ! And our father — but I am his bairn nae langer now— 
O, I hae nae friend left in the warld ! — O, that I were lying deid 
at my mother's side,- in Newbattle kirkyard." 

" Hout, lassie," said Ratcliffe, willing to show the interest which 
he absolutely felt, " dinna be sae dooms doon-hearted as a' that ; 
there's mony a tod hunted that's no killed. Advocate Langtale 
has brought folk through waur snappers than a' this, and there's no 
a cleverer agent than Nichil Novit e'er drew a bill of suspension. 
Hanged or unhanged, they are weel aff has sic an agent and 
counsel ; ane's sure o' fair play. Ye are a bonny lass, too, an ye 
wad busk up your cockernonie a bit ; and a bonny lass will find 
favour wi' judge and jury, when they would strap up a grewsome 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 171 

carle like me for the fifteenth part of a flea's hide and tallow, d — n 
them." 

To this homely strain of consolation the mourners returned no 
answer ; indeed, they were so much lost in their own sorrows as to 
have become insensible of Ratcliffe's presence. " O Effie," said 
her elder sister, " how could you conceal your situation from me ? 
O woman, had I deserved this at your hand ? — had ye spoke but 
ae word — sorry we micht hae been, and shamed we micht hae been, 
but this awfu' dispensation had never come ower us." 

" And what gude wad that hae dune?" answered the prisoner. 
" Na, na, Jeanie, a' was ower when ance I forgot what I promised 
when I faulded down the leaf of my Bible. See," she said, pro- 
ducing the sacred volume, " the book opens aye at the place o' 
itsell. O see, Jeanie, what a fearfu' Scripture ! " 

Jeanie took her sister's Bible, and found that the fatal mark was 
made at this impressive text in the book of Job : " He hath 
stripped me of my glory, and taken the crown from my head. He 
hath destroyed me on every side, and I am gone. And mine hope 
hath he removed like a tree." 

" Isna that ower true a doctrine ?" said the prisoner — " Isna my 
crown, my honour removed ? And what am I but a poor wasted, 
wan-thriven tree, dug up by the roots, and flung out to waste in 
the highway, that man and beast may tread it under foot ? I 
thoucht o' the bonny bit thorn that our father rooted out o' the 
yard last May, when it had a' the flush o' blossoms on it ; and 
then it lay in the court till the beasts had trod them a' to pieces wi' 
their feet. I little thoucht, when I was wae for the bit silly green 
bush and its flowers, that I was to gang the same gate mysell." 

" O, if ye had spoken ae word," again sobbed Jeanie, — " if I 
were free to swear that ye had said but ae word of how it stude wi' 
ye, they couldna hae touched your life this day." 

" Could they na ? " said Effie, with something like awakened 
interest — for life is dear even to those who feel it is a burden — 
" Wha tauld ye that, Jeanie ? " 

" It was ane that kend what he was saying weel eneugh," replied 
Jeanie, who had a natural reluctance at mentioning even the name 
of her sister's seducer. 

" Wha was it ? — I conjure you to tell me," said Effie, seating 
herself upright. — " Wha could tak interest in sic a cast-by as I am 
now? — Was it — was it him ? " 

" Hout," said Ratcliffe, " what signifies keeping the poor lassie 
in a swither ? I'se uphaud it's been Robertson that learned ye that 
doctrine when ye saw him at Muschat's Cairn." 

" Was it him ? " said Effie, catching eagerly at his words — " was 
it him, Jeanie, indeed ? — O, I see it was him — poor lad, and I was 
thinking his heart was as hard as the nether mill-stane — and him 
in sic danger on his ain part — poor George ! " 

.Somewhat indignant at this burst of tender feeling towards the 
author of her misery, Jeanie could not help exclaiming — " O Effie, 
how can ye speak that gate of sic a man as that ? " 

" We maun forgie our enemies, ye ken," said poor Effie, with a 



172 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

' timid look and a subdued voice ; for her conscience told her what 
a different character the feelings with which she still regarded her 
seducer bore, compared with the Christian charity under which 
she attempted to veil it. 

" And ye hae suffered a' this for him, and ye can think o' loving 
him still ? " said her sister, in a voice betwixt pity and blame. 

" Love him ! " answered Effie— " If I hadna loved as woman 
seldom loves, I hadna been within these wa's this day ; and trow 
ye, that love sic as mine is lichtly foigotten? — Na, na — ye 
may hew down the tree, but ye canna change its bend— And 
Jeanie, if ye wad do good to me at this moment, tell me every 
word that he said, and whether he was sorry for poor Effie or no !" 

" What needs I tell ye onything about it ? " said Jeanie. " Ye 
may be sure he had ower muckle to do to save himsell, to speak 
king or muckle about onybody beside." 

" That's no true, Jeanie, though a saunt had said it," replied 
Effie, with a sparkle of her former lively and irritable temper. 
" But ye dinna ken, though I do, how far he pat his life in venture 
to save mine." And looking at Ratcliffe, she checked herself and 
was silent. 

" I fancy," said Ratcliffe, with one of his familiar sneers, " the 
lassie thinks that naebody has een but hersell — Didna I see when 
Gentle Geordie was seeking to get other folk out of the Tolbooth 
forby Jock Porteous? but ye are of my mind, hinny — better sit 
and rue, than flit and rue — Ye needna look ininy face sae amazed. 
I ken mair things than that, maybe." 

" O my God ! my God ! " said Effie, springing up and throwing 
herself down on her knees before him — " D'ye ken where they hae 
putten my bairn ? — O my bairn ! my bairn ! the poor sackless 
innocent new-born wee ane — bone of my bone, and flesh of my 
flesh ! — O man, if ye wad e'er deserve a portion in heaven, or a 
broken-hearted creature's blessing upon earth, tell me where they 
hae put my bairn — the sign of my shame and the partner of my 
suffering ! tell me wha has taen 't away, or what they h*ae dune wi't !" 

" Hout tout," said the turnkey, endeavouring to extricate himself 
from the firm grasp with which sheheld him, " that 's takin me at my 
word wi' a witness — Bairn, quo' she ? How the deil suld I ken ony- 
thing of your bairn, huzzy ? Ye maun ask that of auld Meg Mur- 
dockson, if ye dinna ken ower muckle about it yoursell." 

As his answer destroyed the wild and vague hope which had 
suddenly gleamed upon her, the unhappy prisoner let go her hold 
of his coat, and fell with her face on the pavement of the apart- 
ment in a strong convulsion fit. 

Jeanie Deans possessed, with her excellently clear understanding, 
the concomitant advantage of promptitude of spirit, even in the 
extremity of distress. 

She did not suffer herself to be overcome by her own feelings of 
exquisite sorrow, but instantly applied herself to her sister's, relief, 
with the readiest remedies which circumstances afforded ; and 
which, to do Ratcliffe justice, he showed himself anxious to 
suggest, and alert in procuring. He had even the delicacy to with- 



.THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 173 

draw to the farthest corner of the room, so as to render his official 
attendance upon them as little intrusive as possible, when Effie was 
composed enough again to resume her conference with her sister. 

The prisoner once more, in the most earnest and broken tones, 
conjured Jeanie to tell her the particulars of the conference with 
Robertson, and Jeanie felt it was impossible to refuse her this 
gratification. 

" Do ye mind," she said, " Effie, when ye were in the fever before 
we left Woodend, and how angry your mother, that 's now in a 
- better place, was wi' me for gieing ye milk and water to drink, 
because ye grat for it ? Ye were a bairn then, and ye are a woman 
now, and should ken better than ask what canna but hurt you — 
But come weal or wo, I canna refuse ye onything that ye ask me 
wi' the tear in your ee." 

Again Effie threw herself into her arms, and kissed her cheek 
and forehead, murmuring, " O, if ye ken'd how lang it is since I 
heard his name mentioned ! — if ye) but!| ken'd how muckle good it 
does me but to ken onything o' him, that 's like goodness or kind- 
ness, ye wadna wonder that I wish to hear o' him ! " 

Jeanie sighed, and commenced her narrative of all that had 
passed betwixt Robertson and her, making it as brief as possible. 
Effie listened in breathless anxiety, holding her sister's hand in 
hers, and keeping her eye fixed upon her face, as if devouring every 
word she uttered. The interjections of " Poor fellow," — " Poor 
George," which escaped in whispers, and betwixt sighs, were the 
only sounds with which she interrupted the story. When it was 
finished she made a long pause. 

" And this was his advice ? " were the first words she uttered. 

" Just sic as I hae tell'd ye," replied her sister. 

" And he wanted you to say something to yon folks, that wad 
save my young life ? " 

" He wanted," answered Jeanie, " that I suld be mansworn." 

" And you tauld him," said Effie, " that ye wadna hear o' coming 
between me and the death that I am to die, and me no aughteen 
year auld yet." 

" I told him," replied Jeanie, who now trembled at the turn 
which her sister's reflections seemed about to take, " that I daured 
na swear to an untruth." 

" And what d'ye ca' an untruth ? " said Effie, again showing a 
touch of her former spirit — "Ye are muckle to blame, lass, if ye 
think a mother would, or could, murder her ain bairn — Murder ! — 
I wad hae laid down my life just to see a blink o' its ee ! " 

" I do believe," said Jeanie, " that ye are as innocent of sic a 
purpose as the new-born babe itsell." 

" I am glad ye do me that justice," said Effie, haughtily ; " it's 
whiles the faut of very good folk like you, Jeanie, that they think 
a' the rest of the warld are as bad as the warst temptations can 
mak them." 

" I dinna deserve this frae ye, Effie,' 1 said her sister, sobbing, 
and feeling at once the injustice of the reproach, and compassion 
for the state of mind which dictated it. 



174 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" Maybe no, sister,'' said Effie. " But ye are angry because I 
love Robertson— How can I help loving him, that loves me better 
than body and soul baith? — Here he put his life in a niffer, to 
break the prison to let me out ; and sure am I, had it stood wi' 
him as it stands wi' you " — Here she paused and was silent. 

" O, if it stude wi' me to save ye wi' risk of my life ! " said Jeanie. 

" Ay, lass," said her sister, " that's lightly said, but no sae 
lightly credited, frae ane that winna ware a word for me ; and if it 
be a wrang word, ye'll hae time eneugh to repent o't." 

" But that word is a grievous sin, and it's a deeper offence, when 
it's a sin wilfully and presumptuously committed. 

" Weel, weel, Jeanie," said Effie, " I mind a' about the sins o' 
presumption in the questions — we'll speak nae mair about this 
matter, and ye may save your breath to say your carritch ; and for 
me, I'll soon hae nae breath to waste on onybody." 

" I must needs say," interposed Ratcliffe, " that it 's d— d hard, 
when three words of your mouth would give the girl a chance to 
nick Moll Blood [the gallows], that you make such scrupling about 
rapping [swearing] to them. D — n me, if they would take me, if 
I would not rap to all whatd'yecallums — Hyssop's Fables, for her 
life — I am us'd to't, b — t me, for less matters. Why, I have 
smacked calf-skin [kissed the book] fifty times in England for a 
keg of brandy." 

" Never speak mair o't," said the prisoner. " It's just as weel as it 
is — and gude-day, sister ; ye keep Mr. Ratcliffe waiting on — Yell 

come back and see me, I reckon, before" here she stopped, 

and became deadly pale. 

" And are we to part in this way," said Jeanie, " and you in sic 
deadly peril ? O, Effie, look but up, and say what ye wad hae me 
to do, and I could find in my heart amaist to say that I wad do't." 

" No, Jeanie," replied her sister, after an effort, " I am better 
minded now. At my best, I was never hlflf sae gude as ye were, 
and what for suld you begin to mak yoursell waur to save me, now 
that I am no worth saving ? God knows, that in my sober mind, 
I wadna wuss ony living creature to do a wrang thing to save my 
life. I might have fled frae this tolbooth on that awfu' nicht wi' ane 
wad hae carried me through the warld, and friended me, and fended 
for me. But I said to them, let life gang when gude fame is gane 
before it. But this lang imprisonment has broken my spirit, and 
I am whiles sair left to mysell, and then I wad gie the Indian 
mines of gold and diamonds, just for life and breath — for I think, 
Jeanie, I have such roving fits as I used to hae in the fever ; but, 
instead of the fiery een, and wolves, and Widow Butler's bullseg, 
that I used to see spieling up on my bed, I am thinking now about 
a high, black gibbet, and me standing up, and such seas of faces 
all looking up at poor Effie Deans, and asking if it be her that 
George Robertson used to call the Lily of Saint Leonard's. And 
then they stretch out their faces, and mak mouths, and girn at me, 
and whichever way I look, I see a face laughing like Meg Mur- 
dockson, when she tauld me I had seen the last of my wean. God 
preserve us, Jeanie, that carline has a fearsome face ! " She 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 17S 

clapped her hands before her eyes as she uttered this exclamation, 
as if" to secure herself against seeing the fearful object she had 
alluded to. 

Jeanie Deans remained with her sister for two hours, during 
which she endeavoured, if possible, to extract something from her 
that might be serviceable in her exculpation. But she had nothing 
to say beyond what she had declared on her first examination 
with the purport of which the reader will be made acquainted in 
proper time and place. " They wadna believe her," she said, " and 
she had naething mair to tell them." 

At length Ratcliffe, though reluctantly, informed the sisters that 
there was a necessity that they should part. " Mr. Novit," he said, 
" was to see the prisoner, and maybe Mr. Langtale too. Langtale 
likes to look at a bonny lass, whether in prison or out o' prison." 

Reluctantly, therefore, and slowly, after many a tear, and many 
an embrace, Jeanie retired from the apartment, and heard its jarring 
bolts turned upo.n the dear being from whom she was separated. 
Somewhat familiarized now even with her rude conductor, she 
offered him a small present in money, with a request he would do 
what he could for her sister's accommodation. To her surprise, 
Ratcliffe declined the fee. " I wasna bloody when I was on the 
pad," he said, " and I winna be greedy — that is, beyond what's 
right and reasonable — now that I am in the lock. — Keep the siller ; 
and for civility, your sister sail hae sic as I can bestow; but I hope 
you'll think better on it, and rap an oath for her — deil a hair ill 
there is in it, if ye are rapping again the crown. I ken'd a worthy 
minister, as gude a man, bating the deed they deposed him for, as 
ever ye heard claver, in a pu'pit, that rapped to a hogshead of pig- 
tail tobacco, just for as muckle as filled his spleuchan.* But maybe 
ye are keeping your ain counsel — weel, weel, there's nae harm in 
that. As for your sister, 1'se see that she gets her meat clean and 
warm, and I'll try to gar her lie doun and tak a sleep after dinner, 
for deil a ee she'll close the nicht. I hae gude experience o' these 
matters. The first nicht is aye the warst o't. I hae never heard 
o' ane that sleepit the nicht afore trial, but of mony a ane that 
sleepit as sound as a tap the nicht before their necks were 
straughted. And it's nae wonder— the warst may be tholed when 
it's ken'd — Better a finger aff as aye wagging." 



CHAPTER XXI. 



Yet though thou mayst be dragg'd in scorn 

To yonder ignominious tree, 
Thou shalt not want one faithful friend 

To share the cruel fates' decree. 

Jemmy Dawson. 

After spending the greater part of the morning in his devotions, 
(for his benevolent neighbours had kindly insisted upon discharging 
his task of ordinary labour,) David Deans entered the apartment 



176 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

when the breakfast meal was prepared. His eyes were involun- 
tarily cast down, for he was afraid to look at Jeanie, uncertain as he 
was whether she might feel herself at liberty, with a good conscience, 
to attend the Court of Justiciary that day, to give the evidence 
which he understood that she possessed, in order to her sister's ex- 
culpation. At length, after a minute of apprehensive hesitation, 
he looked at her dress to discover whether it seemed to be in her 
contemplation to go abroad that morning. .Her apparel was neat 
and plain, but such as conveyed no exact intimation of her inten- 
tions to go abroad. She had exchanged her usual garb for morning 
labour, for one something inferior to that with which, as her best, 
she was wont to dress herself for church, or any more rare occasion 
of going into society. Her sense taught her, that it was respectful 
to be decent in her apparel on such an occasion, while her feelings 
induced her to lay aside the use of the very few and simple personal 
ornaments, which, on other occasions, she permitted herself to wear. 
So that there occurred nothing in her external appearance which 
could mark out to her father, with anything like certainty, her in- 
tentions on this occasion. 

The preparations for their humble meal were that morning made 
in vain. The father and daughter sat, each assuming the appear- 
ance of eating, when the other's eyes were turned to them, and de- 
sisting from the effort with disgust, when the affectionate impos- 
ture seemed no longer necessary. 

At length these moments of constraint were removed. The sound 
of St. Giles's heavy toll announced the hour previous to the com- 
mencement of the trial ; Jeanie arose, and, with a degree of com- 
posure for which she herself could not account, assumed her plaid, 
and made other preparations for a distant walking. It was a strange 
contrast between the firmness of her demeanour, and the vacilla- 
tion and cruel uncertainty of purpose indicated in all her father's 
motions ; and one unacquainted with both could scarcely have sup- 
posed that the former was, in her ordinary habits of life, a docile, 
quiet, gentle, and even timid country maiden, while her father, with 
a mind naturally proud and strong, and supported by religious 
opinions, of a stern, stoical, and unyielding character, had in his 
time undergone and withstood the most severe hardships, and the 
most imminent peril, without depression of spirit, or subjugation of 
his constancy. The secret of this difference was, that Jeanie's 
mind had already anticipated the line of conduct which she must 
adopt, with all its natural and necessary consequences ; while her 
father, ignorant of every other circumstance, tormented himself 
with imagining what the one sister might say or swear, or what 
effect her testimony might have upon the awful event of the trial. 

He watched his daughter, with a faltering and indecisive look, 
until she looked back upon him, with a look of unutterable anguish, 
as she was about to leave the apartment. 

" My dear lassie," said he, " I will"— His action, hastily and con- 
fusedly searching for his worsted mittans* and staff, showed his 
purpose of accompanying her, though his tongue failed distinctly 
to announce it. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 177 

" Father," said Jeanie, replying rather to his action than his 
words, " ye had better not." 

" In the strength of my God," answered Deans, assuming firmness, 
" I will go forth." 

And, taking his daughter's arm under his, he began to walk from 
the door with a step so hasty, that she was almost unable to keep 
up with him. A trifling circumstance, but which marked the per- 
turbed state of his mind, checked his course. — "Your bonnet,father?" 
said Jeanie, who observed he had come out with his grey hairs 
uncovered. He turned back with a slight blush on his cheek, being 
ashamed to have been detected in an omission which indicated so 
much mental confusion, assumed his large blue Scottish bonnet, 
and with a step slower, iDut more composed, as if the circumstance 
had obliged him to summon up his resolution, and collect his 
scattered ideas, again placed his daughter's arm under his, and re- 
sumed the way to Edinburgh. 

The courts of justice were then, and are still, held in what is 
called the Parliament Close, or, according to modern phrase, the 
Parliament Square, and occupied the buildings intended for the 
accommodation of the Scottish Estates. This edifice, though in an 
imperfect and corrupted style of architecture, had then a grave, 
decent, and, as it were, a judicial aspect, which was at least entitled 
to respect from its antiquity. For which venerable front, I observed, 
on my last occasional visit to the metropolis, that modern taste had 
substituted, at great apparent expense, a pile so utterly inconsistent 
with every monument of antiquity around, and in itself so clumsy 
at the same time and fantastic, that it maybe likened to the decora- 
tions of Tom Errand the porter, in the trip to the Jubilee, when he 
appears bedizened with the tawdry finery of Beau Clincher. Sect 
transeat cum cceteris erroribus. 

The small quadrangle, or Close, if we may presume still to give 
it that appropriate, though antiquated title, which at Litchfield, 
Salisbury, and elsewhere, is properly applied to designate the en- 
closure adjacent to a cathedral, already evinced tokens of the fatal 
scene which was that day to be acted. The soldiers of the City 
Guard were on their posts, now enduring, and now rudely repelling 
with the butts of their muskets, the motley crew who thrust each 
other forward, to catch a glance at the unfortunate object of trial, as 
she should pass from the adjacent prison to the Court in which her 
fate was to be determined. All must have occasionally observed, 
with disgust, the apathy with which the vulgar gaze on scenes of 
this nature, and how seldom, unless when their sympathies are 
called forth by some striking and extraordinary circumstance, the 
crowd evince any interest deeper than that of callous, unthinking, 
bustle, and brutal curiosity. They laugh, jest, quarrel, and push, 
each other to and fro, with the same unfeeling indifference as if 
they were assembled for some holyday sport, or to see an idle pro-i 
cession. Occasionally, however, this demeanour, so natural to the 
degraded populace of a large town, is exchanged for a temporary 
touch of human affections ; and so it chanced on the present 
occasion. 

M 



i 7 8 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

When Deans and his daughter presented themselves in the Close, 
and endeavoured to make their way forward to the door of the 
Court-house, they became involved in the mob, and subject, of 
course, to their insolence. As Deans repelled with some force the 
rude pushes which he received on all sides, his figure and anti- 
quated dress caught the attention of the rabble, who often show an 
intuitive sharpness in ascribing the proper character from external 
appearance. — 

l f ' Ye're welcome, whigs, 

' Frae Bothwell briggs," 

sung one fellow (for the mob of Edinburgh were at that time 
jacobitically disposed, probably because that was the line of senti- 
ment most diametrically opposite to existing authority). 



" Mess David Williamson, 
Chosen of twenty, 
Ran up the pu'pit stair, 
And sang Killiecrankie," 



chanted a siren, whose profession might be guessed by her appear- 
ance. A tattered cadie, or errand porter, whom David Deans had 
jostled in his attempt to extricate himself from the vicinity of these 
scorners, exclaimed in a strong north-country tone, " Ta deil ding 
out her Cameronian een — what gies her titles to dunch gentlemans 
about?" 

" Make room for the ruling elder," said yet another ; he comes 
to see a precious sister glorify God in the Grassmarket ! " 

" Whisht ; shame's in ye, sirs," said the voice of a man very 
loudly, which, as quickly sinking, said in a low, but distinct tone, 
" It's her father and sister." 

All fell back to make way for the sufferers ; and all, even the 
very rudest and most profligate, were struck with shame and 
silence. In the space thus abandoned to them by the mob, Deans 
stood, holding his daughter by the hand, and said to her, with 
a countenance strongly and sternly expressive of his internal 
emotion, " Ye hear with your ears, and ye see with your eyes, where 
and to whom the backslidings and defections of professors are 
ascribed by the scoffers. Not to themselves alone, but to the kirk 
of which they are members, and to its blessed and invisible Head. 
Then, weel may we take wi' patience our share and portion of this 
out-spreading reproach." 

The man who had spoken, no other than our old friend Dumbie- 
dikes, whose mouth, like that of the prophet's ass, had been opened 
by the emergency of the case, now joined them, and, with his usual 
taciturnity, escorted them into the Court-house. No opposition was 
offered to their entrance, either by the guards or door-keepers ; and 
it is even said, that one of the latter refused a shilling of civility- 
money, tendered him by the Laird of Dumbiedikes, who was of 
opinion that " siller wad mak a' easy." But this last incident wants 
confirmation. 

Admitted within the precincts of the Court-house, they found. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 179 

the usual number of busy office bearers, and idle loiterers, who 
attend on these scenes by choice, or from duty. Burghers gaped 
and stared ; young lawyers sauntered, sneered and laughed, as in 
the pit of the theatre ; while others apart sat on a bench retired, and 
reasoned highly, inter apices juris, on the doctrines of constructive 
crime, and the true import of the statute. The bench was prepared 
for the arrival of the judges. The jurors were in attendance. The 
crown-counsel, employed in looking over their briefs and notes of 
evidence, looked grave, and whispered with each other. They 
occupied one side of a large table placed beneath the bench ; on 
the other sat the advocates, whom the humanity of the Scottish 
law (in this particular more liberal than that of the sister country) 
not only permits, but enjoins, to appear and assist with their advice 
and skill all persons under trial. Mr. Nichil Novit was seen 
actively instructing the counsel for the panel (so the prisoner is 
called in Scottish law-phraseolgy), busy, bustling, and important. 
When they entered the Court-room, Deans asked the Laird, in a 
tremulous whisper, " Where will she sit ? " 

Dumbiedikes whispered Novit, who pointed to a vacant space at 
the bar, fronting the judges, and was about to conduct Deans 
towards it. 

" No ! " he said ; " I cannot sit by her — I cannot own her — not 
as yet, at least — I will keep out of her sight, and turn mine own 
eyes elsewhere — better for us baith." 

Saddletree, whose repeated interference with the counsel had 
procured him one or two rebuffs, and a special request that he 
would concern himself with his own matters, now saw with pleasure 
an opportunity of playing the person of importance. He bustled 
up to the poor old man, and proceeded to exhibit his consequence, 
by securing, through his interest with the bar-keepers and macers, 
a seat for Deans, in a situation where he was hidden from the 
general eye by the projecting corner of the bench. 

" It's gude to have a friend at court," he said, continuing his 
heartless harangues to the passive auditor, who neither heard nor 
replied to them ; " few folk but mysell could hae sorted ye out a 
seat like this — the Lords will be here incontinent, and proceed 
' instanter to trial. They wunna fence the court as they do at the 
Circuit — The High Court of Justiciary is aye fenced. — But, Lord's 
sake, what's this o't ? — Jeanie, ye are a cited witness — Macer, this 
lass is a witness — she maun be enclosed — she maun on nae account 
be at large. — Mr. Novit, suldna Jeanie Deans be enclosed?" 

Novit answered in the affirmative, and offered to conduct Jeanie 
to the apartment, where, according to the scrupulous practice of 
the Scottish Court, the witnesses remained in readiness to be called 
into court to give evidence ; and separated, at the same time, from 
all who might influence their testimony, or give them information 
concerning that which was passing upon the trial. 

" Is this necessary ? " said Jeanie, still reluctant to quit her 
father's hand. 

" A matter of absolute needcessity," said Saddletree ; " wha ever 
heard of witnesses no being enclosed?" 

M 2 



180 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" It is really a matter of necessity," said the younger counsellor, 
retained for her sister ; and Jeanie reluctantly followed the macer 
of the court to the place appointed. 

" This, Mr. Deans," said Saddletree, " is ca'd sequestering a 
witness ; but it's clean different (whilk maybe ye wadna fund out 
o' yoursell) frae sequestering ane's estate or effects, as in cases of 
bankruptcy. I hae aften been sequestered as a witness, for the 
Sheriff is in the use whiles to cry me in to witness the declarations 
at precognitions, and so is Mr. Sharpitlaw ; but I was ne'er like to 
be sequestered o' land and gudes but ance, and that was lang 
syne, afore I was married. But whisht, whisht ! here's the Court 
coming." 

As he spoke, the five Lords of Justiciary, in their long robes 
of scarlet, faced with white, and preceded by their mace-bearer, 
entered with the usual formalities, and took their places upon' the 
bench of judgment. 

The audience rose to receive them; and the bustle occasioned by 
their entrance was hardly composed, when a great noise and con- 
fusion of persons struggling, and forcibly endeavouring to enter at 
the doors of the Court-room and of the galleries, announced that 
the prisoner was about to be placed at the bar. This tumult takes 
place when the doors, at first only opened to those either having 
right to be present, or to the better and more qualified ranks, are at 
length laid open to all whose curiosity induces them to be present on 
the occasion. With inflamed countenances and dishevelled dresses, 
struggling with, and sometimes tumbling over each other, in rushed 
the rude multitude, while a few soldiers, forming, as it were, the 
centre of the tide, could scarce, with all their efforts, clear a passage 
for the prisoner to the place which she was to occupy. By the 
authority of the Court, and the exertions of its officers, the tumult 
among the spectators was at length appeased, and the unhappy 
girl brought forward, and placed betwixt two sentinels with drawn 
bayonets, as a prisoner at the bar, where she was to abide her de- 
liverance for good or evil, according to the issue of her trial. 



CHAPTER XXII. 



We have strict statutes, and most biting laws — 
The needful bits, and curbs for headstrong steeds — 
Which, for these fourteen years, we have let sleep, 
Like to an o'ergrown lion in a cave, 
That goes not out to prey. 

Measure for Measure. 
" Euphemia Deans,*' said the presiding Judge, in an accent in 
which pity was blended with dignity, " stand up, and listen to the 
criminal indictment now to be preferred against you." 

The unhappy girl, who had been stupified by the confusion 
through which the guards had forced a passage, cast a bewildered 
look on the multitude of faces around her, which seemed to tapestry, 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 181 

as it were, the walls, in one broad slope from the ceiling to the floor, 
with human countenances, and instinctively obeyed a command, 
which rung in her ears like the trumpet of the judgment-day. 

" Put back your hair, Effie," said one of the macers. For her 
beautiful and abundant tresses of long fair hair, which, according 
to the costume of the country, unmarried women were not allowed 
to cover with any sort of cap, and which, alas ! Effie dared no 
longer confine with the snood or riband, which implied purity of 
maiden-fame, now hung unbound and dishevelled over her face, 
and almost concealed her features. On receiving this hint from the 
attendant, the unfortunate young woman, with a hasty, trembling, 
and apparently mechanical compliance, shaded back from her face 
her luxuriant locks, and showed to the whole court, excepting one 
individual, a countenance, which, though pale and emaciated, was 
so lovely amid its agony, that it called forth an universal murmur 
of compassion and sympathy. Apparently the expressive sound of 
human feeling recalled the poor girl from the stupor of fear, which 
predominated at first over every other sensation, and awakened her 
to the no less painful sense of shame and exposure attached to 
her present situation. Her eye, which had at first glanced wildly 
around, was turned on the ground; her cheek, at first so deadly 
pale, began gradually to be overspread with a faint blush, which 
increased so fast, that, when in agony of shame she strove to 
conceal her face, her temples, her brow, her neck, and all that 
her slender fingers and small palms could not cover, became of the 
deepest crimson. 

All marked and were moved by these changes, excepting one. 
It was old Deans, who, motionless in his seat, and concealed, as 
we have said, by the corner of the bench, from seeing or being 
seen, did nevertheless keep his eyes firmly fixed on the ground, as 
if determined that, by no possibility whatever, would he be an 
ocular witness of the shame of his house. 

" Ichabod ! " he said to himself — " Ichabod ! my glory is de- 
parted ! " 

While these reflections were passing through his mind, the in- 
dictment, which set forth in technical form the crime of which the 
panel stood accused, was read as usual, and the prisoner was asked 
if she was Guilty, or Not Guilty. 

" Not guilty of my poor bairn's death,'' said Effie Deans, in an 
accent corresponding in plaintive softness of tone to the beauty of 
her features, and which was not heard by the audience without 
emotion. 

The presiding Judge next directed the counsel to plead to the 
revelancy, that is, to state on either part the arguments in point of 
law, and evidence in point of fact, against and in favour of the 
criminal : after which it is the form of the Court to pronounce a 
preliminary judgment, sending the cause to the cognizance of the 
jury, or assize. 

The counsel for the crown briefly stated the frequency of the 
crime of infanticide, which had given rise to the special statute 
under which the panel stood indicted. He mentioned the various 



18a THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

instances, many of them marked with circumstances of atrocity, 
which had at length induced the King's Advocate, though with 
great reluctance, to make the experiment, whether, by strictly en- 
forcing the Act of Parliament which had been made to prevent 
such enormities, their occurrence might be prevented. " He ex- 
' pected," he said, " to be able to establish by witnesses, as well as 
by the declaration of the panel herself, that she was in the state 
described by the statute. According to his information, the panel 
had communicated her pregnancy to no one, nor did she allege in 
her own declaration that she had done so. This secrecy was the 
first requisite in support of the indictment. The same declaration 
admitted, that she had borne a male child, in circumstances which 
gave but too much reason to believe it had died by the hands, or 
at least with the knowledge or consent, of the unhappy mother. It 
was not, however, necessary for him to bring positive proof that 
the panel was accessory to the murder, nay, nor even to prove that 
the child was murdered at all. It was sufficient to support the 
indictment, that it could not be found. According to the stern, but 
necessary severity of this statute, she who should conceal her 
pregnancy, who should omit to call that assistance which is most 
necessary on such occasions, was held already to have meditated 
the death of her offspring, as an event most likely to be the conse- 
quence of her culpable and cruel concealment. And if, under such 
circumstances, she could not alternatively show by proof that the 
infant had died a natural death, or produce it still in life, she must, 
under the construction of the law, be held to have murdered it, and 
suffer death accordingly." 

The counsel for the prisoner, Mr. Fairbrother, a man of con- 
siderable fame in his profession, did not pretend directly to combat 
the arguments of the King's Advocate. He began by lamenting 
that his senior at the bar, Mr. Langtale, had been suddenly called 
to the county of which he was Sheriff, and that he had been applied 
to, on short warning, to give the panel his assistance in this inter- 
esting case. He had had little time, he said, to make up for his 
inferiority to his learned brother by long and minute research ; and 
he was afraid he might give a specimen of his incapacity, by being 
compelled to admit the accuracy of the indictment under the 
statute. " It was enough for their Lordships," he observed, " to 
know, that such was the law, and he admitted the Advocate had a 
right to call for the usual interlocutor of revelancy." But he stated, 
" that when he came to establish his case by proof, he trusted to 
make out circumstances which would satisfactorily elide the charge 
in the libel. His client's story was a short but most melancholy 
one. She was bred up in the strictest tenets of religion and virtue, 
the daughter of a worthy and conscientious person, who, in evil 
times, had established a character for courage and religion, by 
becoming a sufferer for conscience' sake." 

David Deans gave a convulsive start at hearing himself thus 
mentioned, and then resumed the situation, in which, with his face 
stooped against his hands, and both resting against the corner of 
the elevated bench on which the Judges sat, he had hitherto 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. . 183 

listened to the procedure in the trial. The whig lawyers seemed 
to be interested; the tories put up their lip. 

"Whatever may be our difference of opinion," resumed the 
lawyer, whose business it was to carry his whole audience with him 
if possible, " concerning the peculiar tenets of these people," (here 
Deans groaned deeply,) " it is impossible to deny them the praise 
of sound and even rigid morals, or the merit of training up their 
children in the fear of God ; and yet it was the daughter of such a 
person whom a jury would shortly be called upon, in the absence of 
evidence, and upon mere presumptions, to convict of a crime, more 
properly belonging to a heathen, or a savage, than to a Christian 
and civilized country. " It was true," he admitted, " that the ex- 
cellent nurture and early instruction which the poor girl had 
received, had not been sufficient to preserve her from guilt and 
error. She had fallen a sacrifice to an inconsiderate affection for 
a young man of prepossessing manners, as he had been informed, 
but of a very dangerous and desperate character. She was seduced 
under promise of marriage — a promise, which the fellow might have, 
perhaps, done her justice by keeping, had he not at that time been 
called upon by the law to atone for a crime, violent and desperate 
in itself, but which became the preface to another eventful history, 
every step of which was marked by blood and guilt, and the final 
termination of which had not even yet arrived. He believed that 
no one would hear him without surprise, when he stated that the 
father of this infant now a-missing, and said by the learned Advocate 
to have been murdered, was no other than the notorious George 
Robertson, the accomplice of Wilson, the hero of the memorable 
escape from the Tolbooth Church, and, as no one knew better than 
his learned friend the Advocate, the principal actor in the Porteous 
conspiracy." — 

" I am sorry to interrupt a counsel in such a case as the present," 
said the presiding Judge ; "but I must remind the learned gentle- 
man, that he is travelling out of the case before us." 

The counsel bowed, and resumed. " He only judged it neces- 
sary," he said, " to mention the name and situation of Robertson, 
because the circumstance in which that character was placed, went 
a great way in accounting for the silence on which his Majesty's 
counsel had laid so much weight, as affording proof that his client 
proposed to allow no fair play for its life, to the helpless being whom 
she was about to bring into the world. She had not announced to 
her friends that she had been seduced from the path of honour — 
and why had she not done so ? — Because she expected daily to be 
restored to character, by 'her seducer doing her that justice which 
she knew to be in his power, and believed to be in his inclination. 
Was it natural — was it reasonable — was it fair, to expect that she 
should, in the interim, become felo de se of her own character, and 
proclaim her frailty to the world, when she had every reason to 
expect, that, by concealing it for a season, it might be veiled for 
ever ? Was it not, on the contrary, pardonable, that, in such an 
emergency, a young woman, in such a situation, should be found 
far from disposed to make a confidant of every prying gossip, who, 



184 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

with sharp eyes, and eager ears, pressed upon her for an explana- 
tion of suspicious circumstances, Which females in the lower — he 
might say which females of all ranks, are so alert in noticing, that 
they sometimes discover them where they do not exist ? Wayit 
strange, or was it criminal, that she should have repelled their 
inquisitive impertinence, with petulant denials ? The sense and 
feeling of all who heard him would answer directly in the negative. 
But although his client had thus remained silent towards those to 
whom she was not called upon to communicate her situation,— to 
whom," said the learned gentleman, " I will add, it would have been 
unadvised and improper in her to have done so ; yet, I trust, I 
shall remove this case most triumphantly from under the statute^ 
and obtain the unfortunate young woman an honourable dismission 
from your Lordships' bar, by showing that she did, in due time anl 
place, and to a person most fit for such confidence, mention the 
calamitous circumstances in which she found herself. This oc- 
curred after Robertson's conviction, and when he was lying in 
prison in expectation of the fate which his comrade Wilson after- 1 
wards suffered, and from which he himself so strangely escaped. 
It was then, when all hopes of having her honour repaired by wed- 
lock vanished from her eyes, — when an union with one in Robert- 
son's situation, if still practicable, might, perhaps, have been re- 
garded rather as an addition to her disgrace, — it was the7i, that I 
trust to be able to prove that the prisoner communicated and con- 
sulted with her sister, a young woman several years older than her- 
self, the daughter of her father, if I mistake not, by a former 
marriage, upon the perils and distress of her unhappy situation." 

" If, indeed, you are able to instruct that point, Mr. Fairbrother," 
said the presiding Judge 

" If I am indeed able to instruct that point, my Lord," resumed 
Mr. Fairbrother, " I trust not only to serve my client, but to relieve 
your Lordships from that which I know you feel the most painful 
duty of your high office ; and to give all who now hear me the ex- 
quisite pleasure of beholding a creature so young, so ingenuous, and 
so beautiful, as she that is now at the bar of your Lordships' Court, 
dismissed from thence in safety and in honour." 

This address seemed to affect many of the audience, and was 
followed by a slight murmur of applause. Deans, as he heard his 
daughter's beauty and innocent appearance appealed to, was in- 
voluntarily about to turn his eyes towards her ; but recollecting him- 
self, he bent them again on the ground with stubborn resolution. 

" Will not my learned brother, on the other side of the bar," con- 
tinued the advocate, after a short pause, " share in this general joy, 
since, I know, while he discharges his duty in bringing an accused 
person here, no one rejoices more in their being freely and honour- 
ably sent hence ? My learned brother shakes his head doubtfully, 
and lays his hand on the panel's declaration. I understand him 
perfectly — he would insinuate that the facts now stated to your 
Lordships are inconsistent with the confession of Euphemia Deans 
herself. I need not remind your Lordships, that her present defence 
is no whit to be narrowed within the bounds of her former confes- 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 185 

sion ; and that it is not by any account which she may formerly 
have given of herself, but by what is now to be proved for or against 
her, that she must ultimately stand or fall. I am not under the 
necessity of accounting for her choosing to drop out of her declara- 
tion the circumstances of her confession to her sister. She might 
not be aware of its importance ; she might be afraid of implicating 
her sister ; she might even have forgotten the circumstance entirely, 
in the terror and distress of mind incidental to the arrest of so young 
a creature on a charge so heinous. Any of these reasons are suffi- 
cient to account for her having suppressed the truth in this instance, 
at whatever risk to herself ; and I incline most to her erroneous 
fear of criminating her sister, because I observe she has had a 
similar tenderness towards her lover, (however undeserved on his 
part,) and has never once mentioned Robertson's name from 
beginning to end of her declaration. 

" But, my Lords," continued Fairbrother, " I am aware the King's 
Advocate will expect me to show, that the proof I offer is consistent 
with other circumstances of the case, which I do not and cannot 
deny. He will demand of me how Effie Deans's confession to her 
sister, previous to her delivery, is reconcilable with the mystery of 
the birth, — with the disappearance, perhaps the murder (for I will 
not deny a possibility which I cannot disprove) of the infant. My 
Lords, the explanation of this is to be found in the placability, per- 
chance, I may say, in the facility and pliability of the female sex. 
The dulcis Amaryllidis ires, as your Lordships well know, are 
easily appeased ; nor is it possible to conceive a woman so atro- 
ciously offended by the man whom she has loved, but what she will 
retain a fund of forgiveness, upon which his penitence, whether real 
or affected, may draw largely, with a certainty that his bills will be 
answered. We can prove, by a letter produced in evidence, that 
this villain Robertson, from the bottom of the dungeon whence he 
already probably meditated the escape, which he afterwards accom- 
plished by the assistance of his comrade, contrived to exercise 
authority over the mind, and to direct the motions, of this unhappy 
girl. It was in compliance with his injunctions, expressed in that 
letter, that the panel was prevailed upon to alter the line of conduct 
which her own better thoughts had suggested ; and, instead of re- 
sorting, when her time of travail approached, to the protection of 
her own family, was induced to confide herself to the charge of some 
vile agent of this nefarious seducer, and by her conducted to one 'of 
those solitary and secret purlieus of villany, which, to the shame of 
our police, still are suffered to exist in the suburbs of this city, 
where, with the assistance, and under the charge, of a person of 
her own sex, she bore a male child, under circumstances which 
added treble bitterness to the woe denounced against our original 
mother. What purpose Robertson had in all this, it is hard to tell,, 
or even to guess. He may have meant to marry the girl, for her 
father is a man of substance. But, for the termination of the story, 
and the conduct of the woman whom he had placed about 'the 
person of Euphemia Deans, it is still more difficult to account. 
The unfortunate young woman was visited by the fever incidental 



i86 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

to her situation. In this fever she appears to have been deceived 
by the person that waited on her, and, on recovering her senses, 
she found that she was childless in that abode of misery. Her 
infant had been carried off, perhaps for the worst purposes, by the 
wretch that waited on her. It may have been murdered, for what 
I can tell." 

He was here interrupted by a piercing shriek, uttered by the un- 
fortunate prisoner. She was with difficulty brought to compose 
herself. Her counsel availed himself of the tragical interruption, 
to close his pleading with effect. 

" My Lords," said he, " in that piteous cry you heard the elo- 
quence of maternal affection, far surpassing the force of my poor 
words — Rachel weeping for her children ! Nature herself bears 
testimony in favour of the tenderness and acuteness of the prisoner's 
parental feelings. I will not dishonour her plea by adding a word 
more." 

" Heard ye ever the like o' that, Laird ?" said Saddletree to 
Dumbiedikes', when the counsel had ended his speech. " There's 
a chield can spin a muckle pirn out of a wee tait of tow ! Deil 
haet, he kens mair about it than what's in the declaration, and a 
surmise that Jeanie Deans suld hae been able to say something 
about her sister's situation, whilk surmise, Mr. Crossmyloof says, 
rests on sma' authority. And he's cleckit this great muckle bird 
out o' this wee egg ! He could wile the very flounders put o' the 
Firth. — What gar^d my father no send me to Utrecht? — But 
whisht, the court is gaun to pronounce the interlocutor of rele- 
vancy." 

And accordingly the Judges, after a few words, recorded their, 
judgment, which bore, that the indictment, if proved, was relevant 
to infer the pains of law : And that the defence, that the panel had 
communicated her situation to her sister, was a relevant defence : 
And, finally, appointed the said indictment and defence to be sub- 
mitted to the judgment of an assize. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 



Most righteous judge ! a sentence. — Come, prepare. 

Merchant of Venice. 

It is by no means my intention to describe minutely the forms 
of a Scottish criminal trial, nor am I sure that I could draw up an 
account so intelligible and accurate as to abide the criticism of the 
gentlemen of the long robe. It is enough to say that the jury was 
impanelled, and the case proceeded. The prisoner was again /re- 
quired to plead to the charge, and she again replied, " Not Guilty," 
in the same heart-thrilling tone as before. 

The crown counsel then called two or three female witnesses, by 
whose testimony it was established, that Erne's situation had been 
remarked by them, that they had taxed her with the fact, and that 
her answers had amounted to an angry and petulant denial of what 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 187 

they charged her with. But, as very frequently happens, the decla- 
ration of the panel or accused party herself was the evidence which 
bore hardest upon her case. 

In the event of these tales ever finding their way across the 
Border, it may be proper to apprise the southern reader that it is 
the practice in Scotland, on apprehending a suspected person, to 
subject him to a judicial examination before a magistrate. He 
is not compelled to answer any of the questions asked of him, 
but may remain silent if he sees it his interest to do so. But 
whatever answers he chooses to give are formally written down, 
and being subscribed by himself and the magistrate, are produced 
against the accused in case of his being brought to trial. It is true, 
that these declarations are not produced as being in themselves 
evidence properly so called, but only as adminicles of testimony, 
tending to corroborate what is considered as legal and proper evi- 
dence. Notwithstanding this nice distinction, however, introduced 
by lawyers to reconcile this procedure to their own general rule, 
that a man cannot be required to bear witness against himself, it 
nevertheless usually happens that' these declarations become the 
means of condemning the accused, as it were, out of their own 
mouths. The prisoner, upon these previous examinations, has in- 
deed the privilege of remaining silent if he pleases ; but every man 
necessarily feels that a refusal to answer natural and pertinent 
interrogatories, put by judicial authority, is in itself a strong proof 
of guilt, and will certainly lead to his being committed to prison ; 
and few can renounce the hope of obtaining liberty, by giving some 
specious account of themselves, and showing apparent frankness in 
explaining their motives and accounting for their conduct. It, 
therefore, seldom happens that the prisoner refuses to give a judi- 
cial declaration, in which, nevertheless, either by letting out too 
much of the truth, or by endeavouring to substitute a fictitious 
story, he almost always exposes himself to suspicion and to contra- 
dictions, which weigh heavily in the minds of the jury. 

The-declaration of Erne Deans was uttered on other principles, 
and the following is a sketch of its contents, given in the judicial 
form, in which they may still be found in the Books of Adjournal. 

The declarant admitted a criminal intrigue with an individual 
whose name she desired to conceal. " Being interrogated, what 
her reason was for secrecy on this point ? She declared, that she 
had no right to blame that person's conduct more than she did her 
own, and that she was willing to confess her own faults, but not to 
say anything which might criminate the absent. Interrogated, if 
she confessed her situation to any one, or made any preparation for 
her confinement? Declares, she did not. And being interrogated, 
why she forbore to take steps which her situation so peremptorily 
required ? Declares, she was ashamed to tell her friends, and she 
trusted the person she has mentioned would provide for her and the 
infant. Interrogated, if he did so? Declares, that he did not do 
so personally ; but that it was not his fault, for that the declarant 
is convinced he would have laid down his life sooner than the bairn 
or she had come to harm. Interrogated, what prevented him from 



188 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

keeping his promise ? Declares, that it was impossible for him to 
do so, he being under trouble at the time, and declines farther 
answer to this question. Interrogated, where she was from the 
period she left her master Mr. Saddletree's family, until her 
appearance at her father's, at St. Leonard's, the day before she 
was apprehended? Declares, she does not remember. And, on 
the interrogatory being repeated, declares she does not mind 
muckle about it, for she was very ill. On the question being again 
repeated, she declares, she will tell the truth, if it should be the 
undoing of her, so long as she is not asked to tell on other folk ; 
and admits, that she passed that interval of time in the lodging of 
a woman, an acquaintance of that person who had wished her to 
that place to be delivered, and that she was there delivered accord- 
ingly of a male child. Interrogated, what was the name of that 
person ? Declares and refuses to answer this question. Interro- 
gated, where she lives ? Declares, she has no certainty, for that 
she was taken to the lodging aforesaid under cloud of night. Inter- 
rogated, if the lodging was in the city or suburbs ? Declares and 
refuses to answer that question. Interrogated, whether, when she 
left the house of Mr. Saddletree, she went up or down the street ? 
Declares and refuses to answer the question. Interrogated whether 
she had ever seen the woman before she was wished to her, as she 
termed it, by the person whose name she refuses to answer? 
Declares and replies, not to her knowledge. Interrogated, whether 
this woman was introduced to her by the said person verbally, or 
by word of mouth ? Declares, she has no freedom to answer this 
question. Interrogated, if the child was alive when it was born ? 
Declares, that — God help her and it ! — it certainly was alive. 
Interrogated, if it died a natural death after birth ? Declares not 
to her knowledge. Interrogated, where it now is? Declares, she 
would give her right hand to ken, but that she never hopes to see 
mair than the banes of it. And being interrogated, why she 
supposes it is now dead ? the declarant wept bitterly and made no 
answer. Interrogated, if the woman, in whose lodging she was, 
seemed to be a fit person to be with her in that situation ? Declares, 
she might be fit enough for skill, but that she was an hard-hearted 
bad woman. Interrogated, if there was any other person in the 
lodging excepting themselves two ? Declares, that she thinks there 
was another woman ; but her head was so carried with pain of 
body and trouble of mind, that she, minded her very little. Inter- 
rogated, when the child was taken away from her ? Declared, that 
she fell in a fever, and was light-headed, and when she came to her 
own mind, the woman told her the bairn was dead ; and that the 
declarant answered, if it was dead it had had foul play. That, 
thereupon, the woman wis very sair on her, and gave her much ill 
language ; and that the deponent was frightened, and crawled out 
of the house when her back was turned, and went home to Saint 
Leonard's Crags, as well as a woman in her condition dought.* 
Interrogated, why she did not tell her story to her sister and father, 
and get force to search the house for her child, dead or alive ? De- 
clares, it was her purpose to do so, but she had not time. Interro- 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN, 189 

gated, why she now conceals the name of the woman, and the 
place of her abode ? The declarant remained silent for a time, and 
then said, that to do so could not repair the. skaith that was done, 
j but might be the occasion of more. Interrogated, whether she had 
herself, at any time, had any purpose of putting away the child by 
violence ? Declares, never ; so might God be merciful to her — and 
then again declares, never, when she was in her perfect senses ; but 
what bad thoughts the Enemy might put into her brain when she 
was out of herself, she cannot answer. And again solemnly inter- 
rogated, declares, that she would have been drawn with wild horses, 
rather than have touched the bairn with an unmotherly hand. 
Interrogated, declares, that among the ill-language the woman gave 
her, she did say sure enough that the declarant had hurt the bairn 
when she was in the brain-fever ; but that the declarant does not 
believe that- she said this from any other cause than to frighten her, 
and make her be silent. Interrogated, what else the woman said to 
her ? Declares, that when the declarant cried loud for her bairn, 
and was like to raise the neighbours, the woman threatened her, 
that they that could stop the wean's skirling would stop hers, if she 
did not keep a' the lounder [the quieter]. And that this threat, with 
the manner of the woman, made the declarant conclude, that the 
bairn's life was gone, and her own in danger, for that the woman 
was a desperate bad woman, as the declarant judged from the lan- 
guage she used. Interrogated, declares, that the fever and delirium 
were brought on her by hearing bad news, suddenly told to her, but 
refuses to say what the said news related to. Interrogated, why 
she does not now communicate these particulars, which might, per- 
haps, enable the magistrate to ascertain whether the child is living 
or dead ; and requested to observe, that her refusing to do so 
exposes her own life, and leaves the child in bad hands ; as also, 
that her present refusal to answer on such points, is inconsistent 
with her alleged intention to make a clean breast to her sister ? 
Declares, that she kens the bairn is now dead, or, if living, there is 
one that will look after it ; that for her own living or dying, she is 
in God's hands, who knows her innocence of harming her bairn 
with her will or knowledge ; and that she has altered her resolution 
of speaking out, which she entertained when she left the woman's 
lodging, on account of a matter which she has since learned. And 
declares, in general, that she is wearied, and will answer no more 
questions at this time." 

Upon a subsequent examination, Euphemia Deans adhered to 
the declaration she had formerly made, with this addition, that 
a paper found in her trunk being shown to her, she admitted 
that it contained the credentials, in consequence of which she re- 
signed herself to the conduct of the woman at whose lodgings she 
was delivered of the child. Its tenor ran thus : — 

" Dearest Effie, 
" I have gotten the means to send to you by a woman who is 
well qualified to assist you in your approaching streight ; she is not 
what I could wish her, but I cannot do better for you in my present 



190 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

condition. I- am obliged to trust to her in this present calamity, for 
myself arid you too. I hope for the best, though I am now in a 
sore pinch ; yet thought is free — I think Handie Dandie and I may 
queer the stifler [avoid the gallows], for all that is come and gone. 
You will be angry for me writing this, to my little Cameronian Lily ; 
but if I can but live to be a comfort to you, and a father to your 
babie, you will have plenty of time to scold. — Once more, let none 
know your counsel — my life depends on this hag, d — n her — she is 
both deep and dangerous, but she has more wiles and wit than ever 
were in a beldam's head, and has cause to be true to me. Fare- 
well, my Lily — Do not droop on my account — in a week I will be 
yours, or no more my own." 

Then followed a postscript. "If they must truss me, I will repent 
of nothing so much, even at the last hard pinch, as of the injury I 
Tiave done my Lily." 

Effie refused to say from whom she had received this letter, but 
enough of the story was now known, -to ascertain that it came from 
Robertson ; and from the date, it appeared to have been written 
about the time when Andrew Wilson (called for a nickname Handie 
Dandie) and he were meditating their first abortive attempt to 
escape, which miscarried in the manner mentioned in the beginning 
of this history. 

The evidence of the Crown being concluded, the counsel for the 
prisoner began to lead a proof in her defence. The first witnesses 
were examined upon the girl's character. All gave her an excellent 
one, but none with more feeling than worthy Mrs. Saddletree, who, 
with the tears on her cheeks, declared, that she could not have had 
a higher opinion of Effie Deans, nor a more' sincere regard for her, 
if she had been her own daughter. All present gave the honest 
woman credit for her goodness of heart, excepting her husband, 
who whispered to Dumbiedikes, "That Nichil Novit of yours is 
but a raw hand at leading evidence, I'm thinking. What signified 
his bringing a woman here to snotter and snivel, and bother their 
Lordships ? He should hae ceeted me, sir, and I should hae gien 
them sic a screed o' testimony, they shouldna hae touched a hair 
o' her head." 

" Hadna ye better get up and trj^t yet ? " said the Laird. " I'll 
make a sign to Novit." 

" Na, na," said Saddletree, " thank ye for naething, neighbour- 
that would be ultroneous evidence, and I ken what belangs to that ; 
but Nichil Novit suld hae had me ceeted depito tempore!' And 
wiping his mouth with his silk handkerchief with great importance, 
he resumed the port and manner of an edified and intelligent 
auditor. 

Mr. Fairbrother now premised, in a few words, " that he meant 
to bring forward his most important witness, upon whose evidence 
the cause must in a great measure depend. What his client was, 
they had learned from the preceding witnesses ; and so far as 
general character, given in the most forcible terms, and even with 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 191 

tears, could interest every one in her fate, she had already gained 
that advantage. It was necessary, he admitted, that he should pro- 
duce more positive testimony of her innocence than what arose out 
of general character, and this he undertook to do by the mouth of 
the person to whom she had communicated her situation — by the 
mouth of her natural counsellor and guardian — her sister. — Macer, 
call into court, Jean, or Jeanie Deans, daughter of David Deans, 
cowfeeder, at Saint Leonard's Crags." 

When he uttered these words, the poor prisoner instantly started 
up, and stretched herself half-way over the bar, towards the side 
at which her sister was to enter. And when, slowly following the 
officer, the witness advanced to the foot of the table, Effie, with the 
whole expression of her countenance altered, from that of confused 
shame and dismay, to an eager, imploring, and almosf-ecstatic 
earnestness of entreaty, with outstretched hands, hair streaming 
back, eyes raised eagerly to her sister's face, and glistening through 
tears, exclaimed, in a tone which went through the heart of all who 
heard her — " O Jeanie, Jeanie, save me, save me ! " 

With a different feeling, yet equally appropriated to his proud 
and self-dependent character, old Deans drew himself back still 
farther under the cover of the bench ; so that when Jeanie, as she 
entered the court, cast a timid glance towards the place at which 
she had left him seated, his venerable figure was no longer visible. 
He sat down on the other side of Dumbiedikes, wrung his hand 
hard, and whispered, " Ah, Laird, this is warst of a' — if I can but 
win ower this part — I feel my head unco dizzy ; but my Master is 
strong in his servant's weakness." After a moment's mental prayer, 
he again started up, as if impatient of continuing in any one pos- 
ture, and gradually edged himself forward towards the place he 
had just quitted. 

Jeanie in the meantime had advanced to the bottom of the table, 
when, unable to resist the impulse of affection, she suddenly ex- 
• tended her hand to her sister. Effie was just within the distance 
that she could' seize it with both, hers, press it to her mouth, cover 
it with kisses, and bathe it in tears, with the fond devotion that a 
Catholic would pay to a guardian saint descended for his safety ; 
while Jeanie, hiding her own face with her other handS, wept bit- 
terly. The sight would have moved a heart of stone, much more 
of flesh and blood. Many of the spectators shed tears, and it was 
some time before the presiding Judge himself could so far subdue 
his emotion, as to request the witness to compose herself, and the 
prisoner to forbear those marks of eager affection, which, however 
natural, could not be permitted at that time, and in that presence. 

The solemn oath, — " the truth to tell, and no truth to conceal, as 
far as she knew or should be asked," was then administered by the 
Judge " in the name of God, and as the witness should answer to 
G6d at the great day of judgment ; " an awful adjuration, which 
seldom fails to make impression even on the most hardened 
characters, and to strike with fear even the most upright. Jeanie, 
educated in deep and devout reverence for the name and attributes 
.of the Deity, was, by the solemnity of a direct appeal to his person 



192 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN 

and justice, awed, but at the same time elevated above all consi- 
derations, save those which she could, with a clear conscience, call 
him to witness. She repeated the form in a low and reverent but 
distinct" tone of voice, after the Judge, to whom, and not to any 
inferior officer of the court, the task is assigned in Scotland of 
directing the witness in that solemn appeal, which is the sanction 
of his testimony. 

When the Judge had finished the established form, he added in a 
feeling but yet a monitory tone, an advice, which the circumstances 
appeared to him to call for. 

" Young woman," these were his words, " you come before this 
Court in circumstances, which it would be worse than cruel not to 
pity and to sympathize with. Yet it is my duty, to tell you, that 
the truth, whatever its consequences may be, the truth is what you 
owe to your country, and to that God whose word, is truth, and 
whose name you have now invoked. Use your own time in answer- 
ing the questions that gentleman " (pointing to the counsel) " shall 
put to you. — But remember, that what you may be tempted to say 
beyond what is the actual truth, you must answer both here and 
hereafter." 

The usual questions were then put to her : — Whether any one 
had instructed her what evidence she had to deliver? Whether 
any one had given or promised her any good deed, hire, or reward, 
for her testimony ? Whether she had any malice or ill-will at his 
Majesty's Advocate, being the party against whom she was cited as 
a witness ? To which questions she successively answered by a 
quiet negative. But their tenor gave great scandal and offence to 
her father, who was not aware that they are put to every witness 
as a matter of form. 

" Na, na," he exclaimed, loud enough to be heard, " my bairn is 
no like the widow of Tekoah — nae man has putten words into her 
mouth." 

One of the Judges, better acquainted, perhaps, with the Books of 
Adjournal than with the Book of Samuel, was disposed to make 
some instant inquiry after this Widow of Tekoah, who, as he con- 
strued the matter, had been tampering with the evidence. But the 
presiding Judge, better versed in Scripture history, whispered to 
his learned brother the necessary explanation ; and the pause occa- 
sioned by this mistake, had the good effect of giving Jeanie Deans 
time to collect her spirits for the painful task she had to perform. 

Fairbrother, whose practice and intelligence were considerable, 
saw the necessity of letting the witness compose herself. In his 
heart he suspected that she came to bear false witness in her sister's 
cause. 

" But that is her own affair," thought Fairbrother; " and it is my 
business to see that she has plenty of time to regain composure, 
and to deliver her evidence, be it true or be it false — valeat 
quantum." 

Accordingly, he commenced his interrogatories with uninterest- 
ing questions, which admitted of instant reply. 

" You are, I think, the sister of the prisoner ? " 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 



193 



"Yes, sir."- 

" Not the fujl sister, however ? " 

" No, sir — we are by different mothers.'' 

" True ; and you are, I think, several years older than your 
sister ? " 

"Yes, sir," &c. 

After the advocate had conceived that, by these preliminary and 
unimportant questions, he had familiarized the witness with the 
situation in which she stood, he asked, "whether she had not 
remarked her sister's state of health to be altered, during the latter 
part of the term when she had lived with Mrs. Saddletree ? " 

Jeanie answered in the affirmative. 

" And she told you the cause of ft, my dear, I suppose ? " said 
Fairbrother, in an easy, and, as one may say, an inductive sort of 
tone. 

" I am sorry to interrupt my brother," said the Crown Counsel, 
rising ; " but I am in your Lordships' judgment, whether this be 
not a leading question ? " 

" If this point is to be debated," said the presiding Judge, " the 
witness must be removed." 

For the Scottish lawyers regard with a sacred and scrupulous 
horror, every question so shaped by the counsel examining, as to 
■convey to a witness the least intimation of the nature of the answer 
which is desired from him. These scruples, though founded on an 
■excellent principle, are sometimes carried to an absurd pitch of 
nicety, especially as it is generally easy for a lawyer who has his 
wits about him to elude the objection. Fairbrother did so in the 
present case. 

" It is not necessary to waste the time of the Court, my Lord ; 
since the King's Counsel thinks it worth while to object to the form 
of my question, I will shape it otherwise. — Pray, young woman, did 
you ask your sister any question when you observed her looking 
unwell ? — take courage — speak out." 

" I asked her," replied Jeanie, " what ailed her." 

" Very well — take your own time — and what was the answer she 
made ? " continued Mr. Fairbrother. 

Jeanie was silent, and looked deadly pale. It was not that she 
at any one instant entertained an idea of the possibility of prevari- 
cation — it was the natural hesitation to extinguish the last spark of 
hope that remained for her sister. 

" Take courage, young woman," said Fairbrother — "I asked what 
your sister said ailed her when you inquired ? " 

" Nothing," answered Jeanie, with a faint voice, which was yet 
heard distinctly in the most distant corner of the Court-room, — 
such an awful and profound silence had been preserved during the 
anxious interval, which had interposed betwixt the lawyer's ques- 
tion and the answer of the witness. 

Fairbrother's countenance fell ; but with that ready presence of 
mind, which is as useful in civil as in military emergencies, he im- 
mediately rallied. — " Nothing ? True ; you mean nothing at first — 
but when you asked her again, did she not tell you what ailed her?" 



i£l THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

The question was put in a tone meant to make her comprehend 
the importance of her answer, had she not been already aware of 
it. The ice was broken, however, and, with less pause than at first, 
she now replied, — " Alack ! alack ! she never breathed word to me 
about it." 

A deep groan passed through the Court. It was echoed by one 
deeper and more agonized from the unfortunate father. The hope, 
to which unconsciously, and in spite of himself, he had still secretly 
clung, had now dissolved, and the venerable old man fell forward 
senseless on the floor of the Court-house, with his head at the foot 
of his terrified daughter. The unfortunate prisoner, with impotent 
passion, strove with the guards, betwixt whom she was placed. 
" Let me gang to my father ! — I will gang to him — I will gang to 
him — he is dead — he is killed — I hae killed him I" — she repeated in 
frenzied tones of grief, which those who heard them did not 
speedily forget. 

Even in this moment of agony and general confusion, Jeanie did 
not lose that superiority, which a deep and firm mind assures to its 
possessor, under the most trying circumstances. , 

" He is my father — he is our father," she mildly repeated to those 
who endeavoured to separate them, as she stooped, — shaded aside 
his grey hairs, and began assiduously to chafe his temples. 

The Judge, after repeatedly wiping his eyes, gave directions that 
they should be conducted into a neighbouring apartment, and care- 
fully attended. The prisoner, as her father was borne from the 
Court, and her sister slowly followed, pursued them with her eyes 
so earnestly fixed, as if they would have started from their sockets. 
But when they were no longer visible, she seemed to find, in her 
despairing and deserted state, a courage which- she had not yet 
exhibited. 

" The bitterness of it is now past," she said, and then boldly ad- 
dressed the Court. " My Lords, if it is your pleasure to gang on wi' 
this matter, the weariest day will hae its end at last." 

The Judge, who, much to his honour, had shared deeply in the 
general sympathy, was surprised at being recalled to his duty by 
the prisoner. He collected himself, and requested to.know if the 
panel's counsel had more evidence to produce. Fairbrother replied, 
with an air of dejection, that his proof was concluded. 

The King's Counsel addressed the jury for the crown. He said 
in few words, that no one could be more concerned than he was 
for the distressing scene which they had just witnessed. But it 
was the necessary consequence of great crimes to bring distress 
and ruin upon all connected with the perpetrators. He briefly re- 
viewed the proof, in which he showed that all the circumstances of 
the case concurred with those required by the act under which the 
unfortunate prisoner was tried : That the counsel for the panel had 
totally failed in proving that Euphemia Deans had communicated 
her situation to her sister : That, respecting her previous good 
character, he was sorry to observe, that it was females who pos- 
sessed the world's good report, and to whom it was justly valuable, 
who were most strongly tempted, by shame and fear of the world's 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 195 

censure, to the crime of infanticide : That the child was murdered, 
he professed to entertain no doubt. The vacillating and incon- 
sistent declaration of the prisoner herself, marked as it was by 
numerous refusals to speak the truth on subjects, when, according 
to her own story, it would have been natural, as well as advan- 
tageous, to have been candid ; even this imperfect declaration left 
no doubt in his mind as to the fate of the unhappy infant. Neither 
could he doubt that the panel was a partner in this guilt. Who else 
had an interest in a deed so inhuman ? Surely neither Robertson, 
nor Robertson's agent, in whose house she was delivered, had the 
least temptation to commit such a crime, unless upon her account, 
with her connivance, and for the sake of saving her reputation. 
But it was not required of him, by the law, that he should bring 
precise proof of the murder, or of the prisoner's accession to it. 
It was the very purpose of the statute to substitute a certain chain 
of presumptive evidence in place of a probation, which, in such 
cases, it was peculiarly difficult to obtain. The jury might peruse 
the statute itself, and they had also the libel and interlocutor of 
relevancy to direct them in point of law. He put it to the con- 
science of the jury, that under both he was entitled to a verdict of 
Guilty. 

The charge of Fairbrother was much cramped by his having 
failed in the proof which he expected to lead. But he fought his 
losing cause with courage and constancy. He ventured to arraign 
the severity of the statute under which the young woman was tried. 
"In all other cases," he said, "the first thing required of the criminal 
prosecutor was, to prove unequivocally that the crime libelled had 
actually been committed, which lawyers called proving the corpus 
delicti. But this statute, made doubtless with the best intentions, 
and under the impulse of a just horror for the unnatural crime of 
infanticide, ran the risk of itself occasioning the worst of murders, 
the death of an innocent person, to atone for a supposed crime 
which may never have been committed by any one. He was so 
far from acknowledging the alleged probability of the child's violent 
death, that he could not even allow that there was evidence of its 
having ever lived." 

The King's Counsel pointed to the woman's declaration ; to 
which the counsel replied — " A production concocted in a moment 
of terror and agony, and which approached to insanity," he said, " his 
learned brother well knew was no sound evidence against the party 
who emitted it. It was true, that a judicial confession, in presencfc 
of the Justices themselves, was the strongest of all proof, in so 
much that it is said in law, that ' in confitentem nulla sunt partes 
judicis.' But this was true of judicial confession only, by which 
law meant that which is made in presence o£ the justices, and the 
sworn inquest. Of extrajudicial confession, all authorities held 
with the illustrious Farinaceus, and Matheus, 'confessio extrajudi- 
cialis in se nulla estj et quod nullum est, non potest adminiculari' 
It was totally inept, and void of all strength and effect from the 
beginning ; incapable, therefore, of being bolstered up or supported, 
or, according to the law-phrase, adminiculated, by other presump- 

N 2 



i 9 6 THE 'HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

tive circumstances. In the present case, therefore, letting the ex- 
trajudicial confession go, as it ought to go, for nothing," he con- 
tended, "the prosecutor had not made out the second quality of the 
statute, that a live child had been born ; and that, at least, ought 
to be established before presumptions were received that it had 
been murdered. If any of the assize," he said, " should be of 
opinion that this was dealing rather narrowly with the statute, they 
ought to consider that it was in its nature highly penal, and there- 
fore entitled to no favourable construction." 

He concluded a learned speech, with an eloquent peroration on 
the scene they had just witnessed, during which Saddletree fell fast 
asleep. 

It was now the presiding Judge's turn to address the jury. He did 
so briefly and distinctly. 

" It was for the jury," he said, " to consider whether the prose- 
cutor had made out his plea. For himself, he sincerely grieved to 
say, that a shadow of doubt remained not upon his mind concern- 
ing the verdict which the inquest had to bring in. He would not 
follow the prisoner's counsel through the impeachment which he 
Tiad brought against the statute of King William and Queen Mary. 
He and the jury were sworn to judge according to the laws as they 
stood, not to criticise, or to evade, or even to justify them. In no 
civil case would a counsel have been permitted to plead his client's 
case in the teeth of the law ; but in the hard situation in which 
counsel were often placed in the Criminal Court, as well as out of 
favour to all presumptions of innocence, he had not inclined to in- 
terrupt the learned gentleman, or narrow his plea. The present 
law, as it now stood, had been instituted by the wisdom of their 
fathers, to check the alarming progress of a dreadful crime ; when 
it was found too severe for its purpose, it would doubtless be altered 
by the wisdom of the legislature ; at present it was the law of the 
land, the rule of the court, and, according to the oath which they 
had taken, it must be that of the jury. This unhappy girl's situa- 
tion could not be doubted ; that she had borne a child and that 
the child had disappeared, were certain facts. The learned counsel 
had failed to show that she had communicated her situation. All 
the requisites of the case required by the statute were therefore 
before the jury. The learned gentleman had, indeed, desired them 
to throw out of consideration the panel's own confession, which was 
the plea usually urged, in penury of all others, by counsel in his 
situation, who usually felt that the declarations of their clients bore 
Tiard on them. But that the Scottish law designed that a certain 
weight should be laid on these declarations, which, he admitted, 
were quodammodo extrajudicial, was evident from the universal 
practice by which they were always produced and read, as part of 
the prosecutor's probation: In the present case, no person who 
had heard the witnesses describe the appearance of the young woman 
before she left Saddletree's house, and contrasted it with that of her 
state and condition at her return to her father's, could have any 
doubt that the fact of delivery had taken place, as set forth in her 
own declaration, which was, therefore, not a solitary piece of testi- 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 197 

mony, but adminiculated and supported by the strongest circum- 
stantial proof. 

" He did not," he said, '" state the impression upon his own mind 
with the purpose of biasing theirs. He had felt no less than they 
had done from the scene of domestic misery which had been exhi- 
bited before them ; and if they, having God and a good conscience, 
the sanctity of their oath, and the regard due to the law of the 
country, before their eyes, could come to a conclusion favourable to 
this unhappy prisoner, he should rejoice as much as any one in 
Court ; for never had he found his duty more distressing than in 
discharging it that day, and glad he would be to be relieved from 
the still more painful task, which would otherwise remain for him." 

The jury, having heard the Judge's address, bowed and retired, 
preceded by a macer of Court, to the apartment destined for their 
deliberation. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 



Law, take thy victim — May she find the mercy 

In yon mild heaven, which this hard world denies her ! 

It was ah hour ere the jurors returned, and as they traversed the 
crowd with slow steps, as men about to discharge themselves of a 
heavy and painful responsibility, the audience was hushed into pro- 
found, earnest, and awful silence. 

" Have you agreed on your chancellor, gentlemen ?" was the first 
question of the Judge. 

The foreman, called in Scotland the chancellor of the jury, usually 
the man of best rank and estimation among the assizers, stepped 
forward, and, with a low reverence, delivered to the Court a sealed 
paper, containing the verdict, which, until of late years, that verbal 
returns are in some instances permitted, was always couched in. 
writing. The jury remained standing while the Judge broke the 
seals, and, having perused the paper, handed it with an air of 
mournful gravity, down to the Clerk of Court, who proceeded to 
engross in the record the yet unknown verdict, of which, however, 
all omened the tragical contents. A form still remained, trifling 
and unimportant in itself, but to which imagination adds a sort of 
solemnity, from the awful occasion upon which it is used. A lighted 
candle was placed on the table, the original paper containing the 
verdict was enclosed in a sheet of paper, and, sealed with the 
Judge's own signet, was transmitted to the Crown Office, to be pre- 
served among other records of the same kind. As all this is trans- 
acted in profound silence, the producing and extinguishing the 
candle seems a type of the human spark which is shortly afterwards 
doomed to be quenched, and excites in the spectators something of: 
the same effect which in England is obtained by the Judge assuming, 
the fatal cap of judgment. When these preliminary forms had been, 
gone through, the Judge required Euphemia Deans to attend to the; 
verdict to be read. 



198 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

After the usual words of style, the verdict set forth, that the Jury- 
having made choice of John Kirk, Esq., to be their chancellor, and 
Thomas Moore, merchant, to be their clerk, did by a plurality of 
voices, find the said Euphemia Deans Guilty of the crime libelled ; 
but, in consideration of her extreme youth, and the cruel circum- 
stances of her case, did earnestly entreat that the Judge would re- 
commend her to the mercy of the Crown. 

" Gentlemen," said the Judge, " you have done your duty— and a 
painful one it must have been to men of humanity like you. I will, 
undoubtedly, transmit your recommendation to the throne. But it 
is my duty to tell all who now hear me, but especially to inform that 
unhappy young woman, in order that her mind may be settled 
accordingly, that I have not the least hope of a pardon being 
granted in the present case. You know the crime has been increas- 
ing in this land,' and I know farther, that this has been ascribed to 
the lenity in which the laws have been exercised, and that there is 
therefore no hope whatever of obtaining a remission for this 
offence." The jury bowed again, and released from their painful 
office, dispersed themselves among the mass of bystanders. 

The Court then asked Mr. Fairbrother, whether he had anything 
to say, why judgment should not follow on the verdict ? The 
counsel had spent some time in perusing and reperusing the ver- 
dict, counting the letters in each juror's name, and weighing every 
phrase, nay, every syllable, in the nicest scales of legal criticism. 
But the clerk of the jury had understood his business too well. No 
flaw was to be found, and Fairbrother mournfully intimated that he 
had nothing to say in arrest of judgment. 

The presiding Judge then addressed the unhappy prisoner : — 
" Euphemia Deans, attend to the sentence of the Court now to be 
pronounced against you." 

She arose from her seat, and, with a composure far greater than 
could have been augured from her demeanour during some parts of 
the trial, abode the conclusion of the awful scene. So nearly 
does the mental portion of our feelings resemble those which are 
corporeal, that the first severe blows which we receive bring with 
them a stunning apathy, which renders us indifferent to those that 
follow them. Thus said Mandrin, when he was undergoing the 
punishment of the wheel ; and so have all felt, upon whom succes- 
sive inflictions have descended with continuous and reiterated 
violence. 

" Young woman," said the Judge, " it is my painful duty to tell 
you, that your life is forfeited under a law, which, if it may seem in 
some degree severe, is yet wisely so, to render those of your un- 
happy situation aware what risk they run, by concealing, out of 
pride or false shame, their lapse from virtue, and making no prepa- 
ration to save the lives of the unfortunate infants whom they are to 
bring into the world. When you concealed your situation from 
your mistress, your sister, and other worthy and compassionate per- 
sons of your own sex, in whose favour your former conduct had 
given you a fair place, you seem to me to have had -in your con- 
templation, at least, the death of the helpless creature, for whose life 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 199 

you neglected to provide. How the child was disposed of — whether 
it was dealt upon by another, or by yourself — whether the extraor- 
dinary story you have told is partly false, or altogether so, is 
between God and your own conscience. , I will not aggravate your 
distress by pressing on that topic, but I do most solemnly adjure 
you to employ the remaining space of your time in making your 
peace with God, for which purpose such reverend clergymen, as you 
yourself may name, shall have access to you. Notwithstanding the 
humane recommendation of the jury, I cannot afford to you, in the 
present circumstances of the country, the slightest hope that your 
life will be prolonged beyond the period assigned for the execution 
of your sentence. Forsaking, therefore, the thoughts of this world, 
let your mind be prepared by repentance for those of more awful 
moments — for death, judgment, and eternity.— -Doomster, read the 
sentence." * 

When the Doomster showed himself, a tall haggard figure, 
arrayed in a fantastic garment of black and grey, passmented, with 
silver lace, all fell back with a sort of instinctive horror, and made 
wide way for him to approach to the foot of the table. As this 
office was held by the common executioner, men shouldered each 
other backward to avoid even the touch of his garment, and some 
were seen to brush their own clothes, which had accidently become 
subject to such contamination. A sound went through the court, 
produced by each person drawing in their breath hard, as men do 
when they expect or witness what is frightful, and at the same time 
affecting. The caitiff villain yet seemed, amid his hardened bru- 
tality, to have some sense of his being the object of public detesta- 
tion, which made him impatient of being in public, as birds of evil 
omen afe anxious to escape from daylight, and from pure air. 

Repeating after the Clerk of Court, he gabbled over the words of 
the sentence, which condemned Euphemia Deans to be conducted 
back to the Tolbooth of Edinburgh, and detained there until Wed- 
nesday the day of ; and upon that day, betwixt the hours 

of two and four o'clock afternoon, to be conveyed to the common 
place of execution, and there hanged by the neck upon a gibbet. 
*' And this," said the Doomster, aggravating his harsh voice, "I pro- 
nounce for doom" 

He vanished when he had spoken the last emphatic word, like a 
foul fiend after the purpose of his visitation has been accomplished; 
but the impression of horror, excited by his presence and his 
errand, remained upon the crowd of spectators. 

The unfortunate criminal, — for so she must now be termed,— with 
more, susceptibility, and more irritable feelings than her father and 
sister, was found, in this emergence, to possess a considerable share 
of their courage. She had remained standing motionless at the bar 
while the sentence was pronounced, and was observed to shut her 
eyes when the Doomster appeared. But she was the first to break 
silence when that evil form had left his place. 

" God forgive ye, my Lords," she said, " and dinna be angry wi' 
me for wishing it. — we a' need forgiveness. — As for myself I canna 
blame ye, for ye act up to your lights ; and if I havena killed my 



20o HE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

poor infant, ye may witness a' that hae seen it this day, that I hae 
been the means of killing my grey-headed father — I deserve the 
warst frae man, and frae God too— But God is mair mercifu' to us 
than we are to each other." 

With these words the trial concluded. The crowd rushed, bear- 
ing forward and shouldering each other, out of the court, in the 
same tumultuary mode in which they had entered ; and, in excitation 
of animal motion and animal spirits, soon forgot whatever they had 
felt as impressive in the scene which they had witnessed. The 
professional spectators, whom habit and "theory had rendered as 
callous to the distress of the scene as medical men are to those of 
a surgical operation, walked homeward in groups, discussing the 
general principle of the statute under which the young woman was 
condemned, the nature of the evidence, and the arguments of the 
counsel, without considering even that of the Judge as exempt from 
their criticism. 

The female spectators, more compassionate, were loud in excla- 
mation against that part of the Judge's speech which seemed to cut 
off the hope of pardon. 

" Set him up, indeed," said Mrs. Howden, " to tell us that the 
poor lassie behoved to die, when Mr. John Kirk, as civil a gentle- 
man as is within the ports of the town, took the pains to prigg for 
•her himsell." 

"Ay, but, neighbour," said Miss Damahoy, drawing up her thin 
maidenly form to its full height of prim dignity — " I really think 
this unnatural business of having bastard-bairns should be putten 
a stop to. — There isna a hussy now on this side of thirty that you 
can bring within your doors, but there will be chields — writer-lads, 
prentice-lads, and what not — coming traiking after them for their 
destruction, and discrediting ane's honest house into the bargain — 
I hae nae patience wi' them." 

" Hout, neighbour," said Mrs. Howden, " we suld live and let 
live — we hae been young oursells, and we are no aye to judge the 
warst when lads and lasses forgather." 

" Young oursells ! and judge the warst ! " said Miss Damahoy. 
" I am no sae auld as that comes to, Mrs. Howden ; and as for 
what ye ca' the warst, I ken neither good nor bad about the matter, 
I thank my stars ! " 

" Ye are thankfu' for sma' mercies, then," said Mrs. Howden, 
with a toss of her head ; " and as ioryou and young — I trow ye were 
doing for yoursell at the last riding of the Scots Parliament, and 
that was in the gracious year seven, sae ye can be nae sic chicken 
at ony rate." 

Plumdamas, who acted as squire of the body to the two contend- 
ing dames, instantly saw the hazard of entering into such delicate 
points of chronology, and being a lover of peace and good neigh- 
bourhood, lost no time in bringing back the conversation to its 
original subject. 

" The Judge didna tell us a' he could hae tell'd us, if he had liked, 
about the application for pardon, neighbour?," said he ; " there is 
aye a wimple in a lawyer's clew ; but it's a wee bit of a secret." 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 201 

" And what is't — what is't, neighbour Plumdamas ? " said Mrs. 
Howden and Miss Damahoy at once, the acid fermentation of their 
dispute being at once neuturalized by the powerful alkali implied in 
the word secret. 

" Here's Mr. Saddletree can tell ye that better than me, for it 
was him that tauld me," said Plumdamas, as Saddletree came up, 
with his wife hanging on his arm, and looking very disconsolate. 

When the question was put to Saddletree, he looked very scorn- 
ful. " They speak about stopping the frequency of child-murder," 
said he, in a contemptuous tone ; " do ye think our auld enemies 
of England, as Glendook aye ca's them in his printed Statute-book, 
care a boddle whether we didna kill ane anither, skin and birn, 
horse and foot, man, woman, and bairns, all and sindry, omnes et 
singulos, as Mr. Crossmyloof says ? Na, na, it's no that hinders 
them frae pardoning the bit lassie. But here is the pinch of the 
plea. The king and queen are sae ill pleased wi' that mistak about 
Porteous, that deil a kindly Scot will they pardon again, either by 
reprieve or remission, if the hail town o' Edinburgh should be a' 
hanged on ae tow." 

" Deil that they were back at their German kale-yard then, as my 
neighbour MacCroskie ca's it," said Mrs. Howden, " and that's the 
way they're gaun to guide us ! " 

" They say for certain," said Miss Damahoy, " that King George 
flang his periwig in the fire when he heard o' the Porteous mob." 

" He has done that, they say," replied Saddletree, " for less 
thing." 

" Aweel," said Miss Damahoy, " he might keep mair wit in his 
anger — but it's a' the better for his wigmaker, I'se warrant." *- 

" The queen tore her biggonets for perfect anger, — ye'll hae heard 
o' that too ? " said Plumdamas. " And the king, they say, kickit 
Sir Robert Walpole for no keeping doun the mob of Edinburgh ; 
but I dinna believe he wad behave sae ungenteel." 

" It's dooms truth, though," said Saddletree ; " and he was for 
kickin the Duke of Argyle* too." 

" Kickin the Duke of Argyle ! " exclaimed the hearers at once, 
in all the various combined keys of utter astonishment. 

" Ay, but MacCallummore's blood wadna sit doun wi' that ; there 
was risk of Andro Ferrara coming in thirdsman." 

" The duke is a real Scotsman — a true friend to the country," 
answered Saddletree's hearers. 

" Ay, troth is he, to king and country baith, as ye sail hear," con- 
tinued the orator, " if ye will come in by© to our house, for it's 
safest speaking of sic things inter parietes" 

When they entered his shop he thrust his prentice boy out of it, 
and, unlocking his desk, took out, with an air of grave and com- 
placent importance, a dirty and crumpled piece of printed paper ; 
he observed, " This is new corn — it's no everybody could show you 
the like o' this. It's the duke's speech about the Porteous mob, 
just promulgated by the hawkers. Ye shall hear what Ian Roy 
Cean * says for himsell. My correspondent bought it in the Palace 
yard, that's like just under the king's nose— I think he claws up 



202 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

their mittans ! — It came in a letter about a foolish bill of exchange 
that the man wanted me to renew for him. I wish ye wad see 
about it, Mrs. Saddletree." 

Honest Mrs. Saddletree had hitherto been so sincerely distressed 
about the situation of her unfortunate prote'ge'e, that she had 
suffered her husband to proceed in his own way, without attending, 
to what he was saying. The words bills and renew had, however, 
an awakening sound in them ; and she snatched the letter which 
her husband held towards her, and wiping her eyes, and putting on 
her spectacles, endeavoured, as fast as the dew which collected on 
her glasses would permit, to get at the meaning of the needful part 
of the epistle ; while her husband, with pompous elevation, read an 
extract from the speech. 

" I am no minister, I never was a minister, and I never will be 
one " 

" I didna ken his grace was ever designed for the ministry," in- 
terrupted Mrs. Howden. 

" He disna mean a minister of the gospel, Mrs. Howden, but a 
minister of state," said Saddletree, with condescending goodness, 
and then proceeded : " The time was when I might have been a 
piece of a minister, but I was too sensible of my own incapacity to 
engage in any state affair. And I thank God that I had always 
too great a value for those few abilities which nature has given me, 
to employ them in doing any drudgery, or any job of what kind 
soever. I have, ever since I set out in the world, (an4 I believe 
few have set out more early,) served my prince with my tongue ; I 
have served him with any little interest I had, and I have served 
him with my sword, and in my profession of arms. I have held 
employments which I have lost, and were I to be to-morrow de- 
prived of those which still remain to me, and which I have endea- 
voured honestly to deserve, I would still serve him to the last acre 
of my inheritance, and to the last drop of my blood " 

Mrs. Saddletree here broke in upon the orator. — " Mr. Saddle- 
tree, what is the meaning of a' this ? Here are ye clavering about 
the Duke of Argyle, and this man Martingale gaun to break on our 
hands, and lose us gude sixty pounds — I wonder what duke will 
pay that, quotha — I wish the Duke of Argyle would pay his ain 
accounts — He is in a thousand punds Scots on thae very books 
when he was last at Roystoun — I'm no saying but he's a just noble- 
man, and that it's gude siller — but it wad drive ane daft to be con- 
fused wi' deukes and drakes, and thae distressed folk upstairs, 
that's Jeanie Deans and her father. And then, putting the very 
callant that was sewing the curpel out o' the shop, to play wi' 
blackguards in the close — Sit still, neighbours, it's no that I mean 
to disturb yo u; but what between courts o' law and courts o' state, 
and upper and under parliaments, and parliament-houses, here and 
in London, the gudeman's gane clean gyte, I think." 

The gossips understood civility, and the rule of doing as they 
would be done by, too well, to tarry upon the slight invitation 
implied in the conclusion of this speech, and therefore made their 
farewells and departure as fast as possible, Saddletree whispering 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 203 

to Plumdamas that he would " meet him at MacCroskie's," (the 
low-browed shop in the Luckenbooths, already mentioned,) "in the 
hour of cause, and put MacCullummore's speech in his pocket, for 
a' the gudewife's dm." 

When Mrs. Saddletree saw the house freed of her importunate 
visitors, and the little boy reclaimed from the pastimes of the wynd 
to the exercise of the awl, she went to visit her unhappy relative, 
David Deans, and his elder daughter, who had found in her house 
the nearest place of friendly refuge. 



CHAPTER XXV. 



Isab. Alas ! what poor ability's in me to do him good ? 
Lucia. Assay the power you have. 

Measure for Measure. 

When Mrs. Saddletree entered the apartment in which her 
guests had shrouded their misery, she found the window darkened. 
The feebleness which followed his long swoon had rendered it neces- 
sary to lay the old man in bed. The curtains were drawn around 
him, and Jeanie sat motionless by the side of the bed. Mrs. 
Saddletree was a. woman of kindness, nay, of feeling, but not of 
delicacy. She opened the half-shut window, drew aside the curtain, 
and taking her kinsman by the hand, exhorted him to sit up, and 
bear his sorrow like a good man, and a Christian man, as he was. 
But when she quitted his hand, it fell powerless by his side, nor did 
he attempt the least reply. 

" Is all over ? " asked Jeanie, with lips and cheeks as pale as 
ashes, — " And is there nae hope for her ? " 

" Nane, or next to nane," said Mrs. Saddletree ; " I heard the 
Judge-carle say it with my ain ears — It was a burning shame to 
see sae mony o' them set up yonder in their red gowns and black 
gowns, and a' to take the life o' a bit senseless lassie. I had never 
muckle broo o' my gudeman's gossips, and now 1 like them waur 
than ever. The only wiselike thing I heard onybody say, was 
decent Mr. John Kirk of Kirk-knowe, and he wussed them just to 
get the king^s mercy, and nae mair about it. But he spake to un- 
reasonable folk — he might just hae keepit his breath to hae blawn 
on his porridge." 

"But can the king gie her mercy?" said Jeanie, earnestly. 

" Some folk tell me he canna gie mercy in cases of mur in 

cases like hers." 

" Can he gie mercy, hinny ? — I weel I wot he can, when he likes. 
There was young Singlesword, that stickit the Laird of Ballen- 
cleuch, and Captain Hackum, the Englishman, that killed Lady 
Colgrain's gudem'an, and the Master of Saint Clair, that shot the 
twa Shaws, and mony mair in my time — to be sure they were gentle 
blood, and had their kin to speak for them — And there was Jock 
Porteous the other day — I'se warrant there's mercy, an folk could 
win at it." 



204 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

"Porteous!" said Jeanie; "very true— I forget a' that I suld 
maist mind. — Fare ye weel, Mrs. Saddletree ; and may ye never 
want a friend in the hour of distress ! " 

" Will ye no stay wi' your father, Jeanie, bairn ? — Ye had better," 
said Mrs. Saddletree. 

""" I will be wanted ower yonder," indicating the Tolbooth with 
her hand, " and I maun leave him now, or I will never be able to 
leave him. I fearna for his life — I ken how strong-hearted he is — 
I ken it," she said, laying her hand on her bosom, " by my am. 
heart at this minute." 

" Weel, hinny, if ye think it's for the best, better he stay here and 
rest him, than gang back to St. Leonard's." 

" Muckle better— muckle better—God bless you !— God bless 
you ! — At no rate let him gang till ye hear frae me," said Jeanie. 

" But ye'U be back belive ? " said Mrs. Saddletree, detaining her; 
" they winna let ye stay yonder, hinny." 

" But I maun gang to St. Leonard's — there's muckle to be dune, 
and little time to do it in — And I have friends to speak to — God 
bless you — take care of my father." 

She had reached the door of the apartment, when, suddenly turn- 
ing, she came back, and knelt down by the bedside. — " father, . 
gie me your blessing — I dare not go till ye bless me. Say but God 
bless ye, and prosper ye, Jeanie — try but to say that ! " 

Instinctively, rather than by an exertion of intellect, the old man 
murmured a prayer, that " purchased and promised blessings might 
be multiplied upon her." 

" He has blessed mine errand," said his daughter, rising from, 
her knees, " and it is borne in upon my mind that I shall prosper." 

So saying, she left the room. 

Mrs. Saddletree looked after her, and shook her head. " I wish 
she binna roving, poor thing — There's something queer about a' 
thae Deanses. I dinna like folk to be sae muckle better than ither 
folk — seldom comes gude o't. But if she's gaun to look after the 
kye at St. Leonard's, that's another story ; to be sure they maun be 
sorted. — Grizzie, come up here, and tak tent to the honest auld man, 
and see he wants naething. — Ye silly tawpie," (addressing the maid- 
servant as she entered,) "what garr'd ye busk up your cockernony 
that gate ? — I think there's been eneugh the day to gie an awfu' 
warning about your cockups and your fallal duds : — see what they 
a' come to," &c, &c, &c. 

Leaving the good lady to her lecture upon worldly vanities, we 
must transport our reader to the cell in which the unfortunate 
Effie Deans was now immured, being restricted of several liberties 
which she had enjoyed before the sentence was pronounced. 

When she had remained about an hour in the state of stupified 
horror so natural in her situation, she was disturbed by the opening 
of the jarring bolts of her place 0/ confinement, and Ratcliffe 
showed himself. " It's your sister," he said, " wants to speak 
t' ye, Effie." 

" I canna see naebody," said Effie, with the hasty irritability 
which misery had rendered more acute — " I canna see naebody, 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 205 

and least of a' her — Bid her tak care of the auld man — I am nae- 
thing to ony o' them now, nor them to me." 

" She says she maun see ye, though," said Ratcliffe ; and Jeanie, 
rushing into the apartment, threw her arms round her sister's neck, 
who writhed to extricate herself from her embrace. 

" What signifies coming to greet ower me," said poor Effie, 
" when you have killed me ? — killed me, when a word of your mouth 
would have saved me — killed me, when I am an innocent creature 
• — innocent of that guilt at least — and me that wad hae wared body 
and soul to save your finger from being hurt ! " 

" You shall not die,'' said Jeanie, with enthusiastic firmness ; 
" say what you like o' me — think what ye like o' me— only promise 
— for I doubt your proud heart — that ye wunna harm yourself, and 
you sail not die this shameful death." 

" A shameful death I will not die, Jeanie, lass. I have that in 
my heart — though it has been ower kind a ane — that wunna bide 
shame. Gae hame to our father, and think nae mair on me — I have 
eat my last earthly meal." 

" O, this was what I feared !" said Jeanie. 

" Hout, tout, hinnie," said Ratcliffe ; " it's but little ye ken o' 
thae things.. Ane aye thinks at the first dinnle o' the sentence, 
they hae heart eneugh to die rather than bide out the sax weeks ; 
but they aye bide the sax weeks out for a' that. I ken the gate o't 
■weel ; I hae fronted the doomster three times, and here I stand, 
Jim Ratcliffe, for a' that. Had I tied my napkin strait the first 
time, as I had a great mind till 't — and it was a' about a bit grey 
cowt, wasna worth ten punds sterling — where would I have been 
now ? " 

" And how did you escape ? " said Jeanie, the fates of this man, 
at first so odious to her, having acquired a sudden interest in her 
eyes from their correspondence with those of her sister. 

" How did I escape ? " said Ratcliffe, with a knowing wink, — " I 
tell ye I 'scapit in a way that naebody will escape from this Tol- 
booth while I keep the keys." 

" My sister shall come out in the face of the sun," said Jeanie ; 
" I will go to London, and beg her pardon from the king and queen. 
If they pardoned Porteous, they may pardon her ; if a sister asks 
a sister's life on her bended knees, they will pardon her — they shall 
pardon her — and they will win a thousand hearts by it." 

Effie listened in bewildered astonishment, and so earnest was her 
sister's enthusiastic assurance, that she almost involuntarily caught 
a gleam of hope ; but it instantly faded away. 

" Ah, Jeanie ! the king and queen live in London, a thousand 
miles from this — far ayont the saut sea ; I '11 be gane before ye win 
there." 

"You are mistaen," said Jeanie ; "it is no sae far, and they go 
to it bv land ; I learned something about thae things from Reuben 
Butler!" 

" Ah, Jeanie ! ye never learned onything but what was gude frae 
the folk ye keepit company wi' ; but I — but I " — she wrung her 
hands, and wept bitterly. 



ao6 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

"Dinna think on that now," said Jeanie ; " there will be time for 
that if the present space be redeemed. Fare ye weeL Unless I 
die by the road, I will see the king's face that gies grace— O, sir," 
(to Ratcliffe,) " be kind to her — She ne'er ken'd what it was to need 
a stranger's kindness till now. — Fareweel — fareweel, Effie ! — Dinna 
speak to me — I mauna greet now — my head's ower dizzy already ! " 
' She tore herself from her sister's arms, and left the cell. Rat- 
cliffe followed her, and beckoned her into a small room. She 
obeyed his signal, but not without trembling. 

" What's the fule thing shaking for ? " said he ; " I mean nothing 
but civility to you. D— n me, I respect you, and I can't help it. 
You have so much spunk, that, d — n me, but I think there's some 
chance of your carrying the day. But you must not go to the king 
till you have made some friend ; try the duke — try MacCallummore ; 
he's Scotland's friend — I ken that the great folks dinna mucklelike 
him — but they fear him, and that will serve your purpose as weel. 
D' ye ken naebody wad gie ye a letter to him ? " 

" Duke of Argyle !" said Jeanie, recollecting herself suddenly — 
" what was he to that Argyle that suffered in my father's time— in 
the persecution ? " 

" His son or grandson, I'm thinking," said Ratcliffe ; " but what 
o'that?" 

" Thank God ! " said Jeanie, devoutly clasping her hands. 

" You whigs are aye thanking God for something," said the ruf- 
fian. " But hark ye, hinny, I'll tell ye a secret. Ye may meet wi' 
rough customers on the Border, or in the Midland, afore ye get to 
Lunnon. Now, deil ane o' them will touch an acquaintance o' 
Daddie Ratton's ; for though I am retired frae public practice, yet 
they ken I can do a gude or an ill turn yet — and deil a gude fellow 
that has been but a twelvemonth on the lay, be he ruffler or padder, 
but he knows my gybe [pass] as well as the jark [seal] of e'er a 
queer cuffin [justice of peace] in England — and there's rogue's 
Latin for you." 

It was, indeed, totally unintelligible to Jeanie Deans, who was 
only impatient to escape from him. He hastily scrawled a line or 
two on a dirty piece of paper, and said to her, as she drew back 
when he offered it. " Hey ! what the deil — it wunna bite you, my 
lass — if it does nae gude, it can do nae ill. But I wish you to show 
it, if you have ony fasherie wi' ony o' St. Nicholas's clerks." 

" Alas ! " said she, " I do not understand what you mean?" 

" I mean, if ye fall among thieves, my precious,— that is a Scrip- 
ture phrase, if ye will hae ane — the bauldest of them will ken a 
scart o' my guse feather. And now awa wi' ye — and stick to Argyle ; 
if onybody can do the job, it maun be him." 

After casting an anxious look at the grated windows and black- 
ened walls of the old Tolbooth, and another scarce less anxious at 
the hospitable lodging of Mrs. Saddletree, Jeanie turned her back 
on that quarter, and soon after on the city itself. She reached Saint 
Leonard's Crags without meeting any one whom she knew, which, 
in the state of her mind, she considered as a great blessing. I must 
do naething, she thought, as she went along, that can soften or 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 207 

weaken my heart — it's ower weak already for what I hae to do. 
I will think and act as firmly as I can, and speak as little. 

There was an ancient servant, or rather cottar, of her father's, 
who had lived under him for many years, and whose fidelity was 
worthy of full confidence. She sent for this woman, and explaining 
to her that the circumstances of her family required that she should 
undertake a journey, which would detain her for some weeks from 
home, she gave her full instructions concerning the management of 
the domestic concerns in her absence. With a precision, which, 
upon reflection, she herself could not help wondering at, she de- 
scribed and detailed the most minute steps which were to be taken, 
and especially such as were necessary for her father's comfort. 
" It was probable," she said, "that he would return to St. Leonard's 
to-morrow ; certain that he would return very soon — all must be in 
order for him. He had- eneugh to distress him, without being 
fashed about warldly matters." 

In the meanwhile, she toiled busily, along with May Hettly, to 
leave nothing unarranged. 

It was deep in the night when all these matters were settled ; 
and when they had partaken of some food, the first which Jeanie 
had tasted on that eventful day, May Hettly, whose usual residence 
was a cottage at a little distance from Deans's house, asked her 
young mistress, whether she would not permit her to remain in the 
house all night ? " Ye hae had an awfu' day," she said, " and 
sorrow and fear are but bad companions in the watches of the 
night, as I hae heard the gudeman say himsell." 

" They are ill companions indeed," said Jeanie ; " but I maun 
learn to abide their presence, and better begin in the house than in 
the field." 

She dismissed her aged assistant accordingly, — for so slight was 
the gradation in their rank of life, that we can hardly term May 
a servant, — and proceeded to make a few preparations for her 
journey. 

The simplicity of her education and country made these prepa- 
rations very brief and easy. Her tartan screen served all the pur- 
poses of a riding-habit and of an umbrella ; a small bundle con- 
tained such changes of linen as were absolutely necessary. Bare- 
footed, as Sancho says, she had come into the world, and bare- 
footed she proposed to perform her pilgrimage ; and her clean 
shoes and change of snow-white thread stockings were to be re- 
served for special occasions of ceremony. She was not aware, that 
the English habits of comfort attach an idea of abject misery to 
the idea of a barefooted traveller ; and if the objection of cleanli- 
ness had been made to the practice, she would have been apt to 
vindicate herself upon the very frequent ablutions to which, with 
Mahometan scrupulosity, a Scottish damsel of some condition 
usually subjects herself. Thus far, therefore, all was well. 

From an oaken press, or cabinet, in which her father kept a few 

old books, and two or three bundles of papers, besides his ordinary 

, accounts and receipts, she sought out and. extracted from a parcel 

of notes of sermons, calculations of interest, records of dying 



2o8 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

speeches of the martyrs, and the like, one or two documents which 
she thought might be of some use to her upon her mission. But 
the most important difficulty remained behind, and it had not 
occurred to her until that very evening. It was the want of money, 
without which it was impossible she could undertake so distant a 
journey as she now meditated. 

David Deans, as we have said, was easy, and even opulent in his 
circumstances. But his wealth, like that of the patriarchs of old, 
consisted in his kine and herds, and in two or three sums lent out 
at interest to neighbours or relatives, who, far from being in cir- 
cumstances to pay anything to account of the principal sums, 
thought they did all that was incumbent, on them when, with con- 
siderable difficulty, they discharged " the annual rent." To these 
debtors it would be in vain, therefore, to apply, even with her 
father's concurrence ; nor could she hope to obtain such concur- 
rence, or assistance in any mode, without such a series of explana- 
tions and debates as she felt might deprive her totally of the power 
of taking the step, which, however daring and hazardous, she felt 
was absolutely necessary for trying the last chance in favour of her 
sister. Without departing from filial reverence, Jeanie had an in- 
ward conviction that the feelings of her father, however just, and 
upright, and honourable, were too little in unison with the spirit of 
the time to admit of his being a good judge of the measures to be 
adopted in this crisis. Herself more flexible in manner, though no 
less upright in principle, she felt that to ask his consent to her 
pilgrimage would.be, to encounter the risk of drawing down his 
positive prohibition, and under that she believed her journey could 
not be blessed in its progress and event. Accordingly, she had 
determined upon the means by which she might communicate to 
him her undertaking and its purpose, shortly after her actual de- 
parture. But it was impossible to apply to him for money without 
altering this arrangement, and discussing fully the propriety of her 
journey ; pecuniary assistance from that quarter, therefore, was 
laid out of the question. 

It now occurred to Jeanie that she should have consulted with 
Mrs. Saddletree on the subject. ( But besides the time that must 
now necessarily be lost in recurring to her assistance, Jeanie 
internally revolted from it. Her heart acknowledged the goodness 
of Mrs. Saddletree's general character, and the kind interest she 
took in their family misfortunes ; but still she felt that Mrs. Saddle- 
tree was a woman of an ordinary and worldly way of thinking, 
incapable, from habit and temperament, of taking a keen or enthu- 
siastic view of such a resolution as she had formed ; and to debate 
the point with her, and to rely upon her conviction of its propriety 
for the means of carrying it into execution would have been gall 
and wormwood. 

Butler, whose assistance she might have been assured of, was 
greatly poorer than herself. In these circumstances, she formed a 
singular resolution for the purpose of surmounting this difficulty, 
the execution of which will form the subject of the next chapter. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 309 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

'Tis the voice of the sluggard, I've heard him complain, 
" You have waked me too soon, I must slumber again ; " 
As the door on its hinges, so he on his bed, 
Turns his side, and his shoulders, and his heavy head. 

Dr. Watts. 

The mansion-house of Dumbiedikes, to which we are now to 
introduce our readers, lay three or four miles — no matter for the 
exact topography — to the southward of St. Leonard's. It had once 
borne the appearance of some little celebrity ; for the " auld laird," 
whose humours and pranks were often mentioned in the ale-houses. 
for about a mile round it, wore a sword, kept a good horse, and a. 
brace of greyhounds ; brawled, swore, and betted at cock-fights, 
and horse-matches ; followed Somerville of Drum's hawks, and the- 
Lord Ross's hounds, and called himself point devise a gentleman. 
But the line had been veiled of its splendour in the present pro- 
prietor, who cared for no rustic amusements, and was as saving,, 
timid, and retired, as his father had been at once grasping and' 
selfishly extravagant, — daring, wild, and intrusive. 

Dumbiedikes was what is called in Scotland a single house ; that 
is, having only one room occupying its whole depth from back to 
front, each of which single apartments was illuminated by six or 
eight cross-lights, whose diminutive panes and heavy frames per- 
mitted scarce so much light to enter as . shines through one well- 
constructed modern window. This inartificial edifice, exactly such, 
as a child would build with cards, having a steep roof flagged with 
coarse grey stones instead of slates ; a half-circular turret, battle- 
mented, or, to use the appropriate phrase, bartizan'd on the top,, 
served as a case for a narrow turnpike-stair, by which an ascent 
was gained from story to story ; and at the bottom of the said 
turret was a door studded with large-headed nails. There was no 
lobby at the bottom of the tower, and scarce a landing-place oppo- 
site to the doors which gave access to the apartments. One or 
two low and dilapidated outhouses, connected by a court-yard wall 
equally ruinous, surrounded the mansion. The court had been 
paved, but the flags being partly displaced, and partly renewed, 
a gallant crop of docks and thistles sprung up between them, 
and the small garden, which opened by a postern through 
the wall, seemed not to be in a much more orderly condition. 
Over the low-arched gateway which led into the yard, there was a 
carved stone, exhibiting some attempt at armorial bearings ; and 
above the inner entrance hung, and had hung, for many years, the 
mouldering hatchment, which announced that umquhile Laurence 
Dumbie, of Dumbiedikes, had been gathered to his fathers in 
Newbattle kirkyard. The approach to this palace of pleasure was 
by a road formed by the rude fragments of stone gathered from the 
fields, and it was surrounded by ploughed, but unenclosed land. 



2io THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

Upon a baulk, that is, an unploughed ridge of land interposed 
-among the corn; the Laird's trusty palfrey was tethered by the 
head, and picking a meal of grass. The whole argued neglect and 
discomfort ; the consequence, however, of idleness and indifference, 
not of poverty. 

In this inner court, not without a sense of bashfulness and 
timidity, stood Jeanie Deans, at an early hour in a fine spring 
morning. She was no heroine of romance, and therefore looked 
with some curiosity and interest on the mansion-house and 
domains, of which, it might at that moment occur to her, a little 
encouragement, such as women of all ranks know by instinct how 
to- apply, might have made her mistress. Moreover, she was no 
person of taste beyond her time, rank, and country, and certainly 
thought the house of Dumbieflikes, though inferior to Holyrood 
House, or the palace at Dalkeith, was still a stately structure in its 
way, and the land a " very bonny bit, if it were better seen to and 
■done to." But Jeanie Deans was a plain, true-hearted, honest girl, 
who, while she acknowledged all the splendour of her old admirer's 
habitation, and the value of his property, never for a moment har- 
boured a thought of doing the Laird, Butler, or herself, the injus- 
tice, which many ladies of higher rank would not have hesitated to 
do to all three, on much less temptation. 

Her present errand being with the laird, she looked round the 
offices to see if she could find any domestic to announce that she 
wished to see him. As all was silence, she ventured to open one 
door : — it was the old laird's dog-kennel, now deserted, unless when 
occupied, as one or two tubs seemed to testify, as a washing-house. 
She tried another — it was the roofless shed where the hawks had 
been once kept, as appeared from a perch or two not yet com- 
pletely rotten, and a lure and jesses which were mouldering on the 
wall. A third door led to the coal-house, which was well stocked. 
To keep a very good fire, was one of the few points of domestic 
management in which Dumbiedikes was positively active; in all 
other matters of domestic economy he was completely passive, and 
at the mercy of his housekeeper, the same buxom dame whom his 
father had long since bequeathed to his charge, and who, if fame did 
her no injustice, had feathered her nest pretty well at his expense. 

Jeanie went on opening doors, like the second Calendar wanting 
an eye, in the castle of the hundred obliging damsels, until, like 
the said prince errant, she came to a stable. The Highland 
iPegasus, Rory Bean, to which belonged the single entire stall, was 
her old acquaintance, whom she had seen grazing on the baulk, as 
she failed not to recognise by the well-known ancient riding fur- 
niture and demi-pique saddle, which half hung on the walls, half 
trailed on the litter. Beyond the " treviss,'' which formed one side 
of the stall, stood a cow, who turned her head and lowed when 
Jeanie came into the stable, an appeal which her habitual occupa- 
tions enabled her perfectly to understand, and with which she 
could not refuse complying, by shaking down some fodder to the 
animal, which had been neglected like most things else in the 
castle of the sluggard. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 211 

While she was accommodating " the milky mother " with the 
food which she should have received two hours sooner, a slip-shod 
wench peeped into the stable, and perceiving that a stranger was 
employed in discharging the task which she at length, and re- 
luctantly, had quitted her slumbers to perform, ejaculated, " Eh, 
sirs ! the Brownie ! the Brownie ! " and fled, yelling as if she had 
seen the devil. 

To explain her terror, it may be necessary to notice, that the 
■old house of Dumbiedikes had, according to report, been long 
haunted by a Brownie, one of those familiar spirits, who were 
"believed in ancient times to supply the deficiencies of the ordinary 
labourer — 

" Whirl the long mop, and ply the airy flail." 

Certes, the convenience of such a supernatual assistance could 
have been nowhere more sensibly felt, than in a family where the 
domestics were so little disposed to personal activity ; yet this 
serving maiden was so far from rejoicing in seeing a supposed 
aerial substitute discharging a task which she should have long since 
performed herself, that she proceeded to raise the family by her 
screams of horror, uttered as thick as if the Brownie had been flaying 
her. Jeanie, who had immediately resigned her temporary occupa- 
tion, and followed the yelling damsel into the courtyard, in order 
to undeceive and appease her, was there met by Mrs. Janet Bal- 
christie, the favourite sultana of the last Laird, as scandal went — 
the housekeeper of the present. The good-looking buxom woman, 
betwixt forty and fifty, (for such we described her at the death of 
the last Laird,) was now a fat, red-faced old dame of seventy, or 
thereabouts, fond of her place, and jealous of her authority. Con- 
scious that her administration did not rest on so sure a basis as in 
the time of the old proprietor, this considerate lady had introduced 
into the family the screamer aforesaid, who added good features 
and .bright eyes to the powers of her lungs. She made no con- 
quest of the Laird, however, who seemed to live as if there was not 
another woman in the world but Jeanie Deans, and to .bear no 
very ardent or overbearing affection even to her. Mrs. Janet 
Bakhristie, notwithstanding, had her own uneasy thoughts upon 
the almost daily visits to Saint Leonard's Crags, and often, when 
the Laird looked at her wistfully, and paused, according to his 
custom before utterance, she expected him to say, " Jenny, I am 
gaun to change my condition ; " but she was relieved by " Jenny, 
I am gaun to change my shoon." 

Still, however, Mrs. Bakhristie regarded Jeanie Deans with no 
small portion of malevolence, the customary feeling of such persons 
towards any one who they think has the means of doing them an 
injury. But she had also a general aversion to any female, toler- 
ably young, and decently well-looking, who showed a wish to 
approach the house of Dumbiedikes and the proprietor thereof. 
And as she had raised her mass of mortality out of bed two hours 
earlier than usual, to come to the rescue of her clamorous niece, 
she was in such extreme bad humour against all and sundry, that 

,0 2 



212 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

Saddletree would have pronounced, that she harboured inimicitiam 
contra omnes mortales. 

" Wha the deil are ye ? " said the fat dame to poor Jeanie, whom 
she did not immediately recognise, " scouping about a decent house 
at sic an hour in the morning ? " 

" It was ane wanting to speak to the Laird," said Jeanie, who 
felt something of the intuitive terror which she had formerly en- 
tertained for this termagant, when she was occasionally at Dumbie- 
dikes on business of her father's. 

"Ane! — And what sort of ane are ye? — hae ye nae name? — 
D'ye think his honour has naething else to do than to speak wi' 
ilka idle tramper that comes about the toun, and him in his bed yet, 
honest man ? " 

" Dear Mrs. Balchristie," replied Jeanie, in a submissive tone, 
" d'ye no mind me ? — d'ye no mind Jeanie Deans ? " 

" Jeanie Deans ! " said the termagant, in accents affecting the 
utmost astonishment ; then, taking two strides nearer to her, she 
peered into her face with a stare of curiosity, equally scornful and 
malignant — " I say Jeanie Deans indeed — Jeanie Deevil, they had 
better hae ca'ed ye ! — A bonny spot o' wark your tittie and you 
hae made out, murdering a puir wean, and your light limmer o' a 
sister's to be hanged fort, as weel she deserves ! — And the like o' 
you to come to ony honest man's house, and want to be into a decent 
bachelor gentleman's room at this time in the morning, and him. 
in his bed ! — Gae wa', gae wa' ! " 

Jeanie was struck mute with shame at the unfeeling brutality of 
this accusation, and could not even find words to justify herself 
from the vile construction put upon her visit, when Mrs,. Balchristie, 
seeing her advantage, continued in the same tone, " Come, come, 
bundle up your pipes and tramp awa wi' ye ! — ye may be seeking a 
father to another wean for ony thing I ken. If it warna that your 
father, auld David Deans, had been a tenant on our land, I would 
cry up the men-folk, and hae ye dookit in the burn for your 
impudence." 

Jeanie had already turned her back, and was walking towards 
the door of the courtyard, so that Mrs. Balchristie, to make her 
last threat impressively audible to her, had raised her stentorian 
voice to its utmost pitch. But, like many a general, she lost the 
engagement by pressing her advantage too far. 

The Laird had been disturbed in his morning slumbers by the 
tones of Mrs. Balchristie's objurgation, sounds in themselves by no 
means uncommon, but very remarkable, in respect to the early 
hour at which they were now heard. He turned himself on the 
other side, however, in hopes the squall would blow by, when, in 
the course of Mrs. Balchristie's second explosion of wrath, the name 
of Deans distinctly struck the tympanum of his ear. As he was, in 
some degree, aware of the small portion of benevolence with which 
his housekeeper regarded the family at Saint Leonard's, he in- 
stantly conceived that some message from thence was the cause of 
this untimely ire, and getting out of his bed, he slipt as speedily as 
possible into an old brocaded night-gown, and some other necessary 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIATJ. 213 

garments, clapped on his head his father's gold-laced hat, (for 
though he was seldom seen without it, yet it is proper to contra- 
dict the popular report, that he slept in it, as Don Quixote did in his 
helmet), and opening the window of his bedroom, beheld, to his 
great astonishment, the well-known figure of Jeanie Deans herself 
retreating from his gate ; while his housekeeper, with arms a-kim- 
bo, fist clenched and extended, body erect, and head shaking with 
rage, sent after her a volley of Billingsgate oaths. His choler rose 
in proportion to the surprise, and perhaps, to the disturbance of his 
repose. " Hark ye," he exclaimed from the window, " ye auld limb 
of Satan — wha the deil gies you commission to guide an honest 
man's daughter that gate ! " 

Mrs. Balchristie was completely caught in the manner. She was 
aware, from the unusual warmth with which the Laird expressed 
himself, that he was quite serious in this matter, and she knew 
that, with all his indolence of nature, there were points on which he 
might be provoked, and that, being provoked, he had in him some- 
thing dangerous, which her wisdom taught her to fear accordingly. 
She began, therefore, to retract her false step as fast as she could. 
" She was but speaking for the house's credit, and she couldna think 
of disturbing his honour in the morning sae early, when the young 
woman might as weel wait or call again ; and to be sure, she might 
make a mistake between the twa sisters, for ane o' them wasna sae 
creditable an acquaintance." 

" Haud your peace, ye auld jade," said Dumbiedikes ; "the warst 
quean e'er stude in their shoon may ca' you cousin, an a' be true 
that I have heard. — Jeanie, my woman, gang into the parlour — but 
stay, that winna be redd up yet — wait there a minute till I come 
down to let ye in — Dinna mind what Jenny says to ye." 

" Na, na," said Jenny, with a laugh of affected heartiness, "never 
mind me, lass — a' the warld kens my bark's waur than my bite — if 
ye had had an appointment wi' the Laird, ye might hae tauldme — 
I am nae uncivil person — gang your ways in by, hinny." And she 
opened the door of the house with a master-key. 

" But I had no appointment wi' the Laird," said Jeanie, drawing 
back ; " I want just to speak twa words to him, and I wad rather 
do it standing here, Mrs. Balchristie." 

" In the open court-yard ? — Na, na, that wad never do, lass ; we 
maunna guide ye that gate neither — And how's that douce honest 
man, your father?" 

Jeanie was saved the pain of answering this hypocritical question 
by the appearance of the Laird himself. 

" Gang in and get breakfast ready," said he to his housekeeper — 
" and, d'ye hear, breakfast wi' us yoursell — ye ken how to manage 
thae porringers of tea-water — and, hear ye, see abune a' that there's 
a gude fire. — Weel, Jeanie, my woman, gang in by — gang in by, and 
rest ye." 

" Na, Laird," Jeanie replied, endeavouring as much as she could 
to express herself with composure, notwithstanding she still trem- 
bled, " I canna gang in — I have a lang day's darg afore me — I maun 
be twenty mile o' gate the nicht yet, if feet will carry me." 



214 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" Guide and deliver us ! — twenty mile— twenty mile on your 
feet!" ejaculated Dumbiedikes, whose walks were of a very 
circumscribed diameter, — "Ye maun never think o' that — come 
in by." 

, " I canna do that, Laird," replied Jeanie ; "the twa words I hae 
to say to ye I can sae here ; forby that Mrs. Balchristie " 

" The deil flee awa wi' Mrs. Balchristie," said Dumbiedikes, "and 
he '11 hae a heavy lading o' her ! I tell ye, Jeanie Deans, I am a. 
man of few words, but I am laird at hame, as well as in the field ; 
deil a brute or body about my house but I can manage when I like,, 
except Rory Bean, my powny ; but I can seldom be at the plague, 
an it binna when my bluid's up." 

" I was wanting to say to ye, Laird," said Jeanie, who felt the 
necessity of entering upon her business, ".that I was gaun a- lang 
journey, outby of my father's knowledge." 

" Outby his knowledge, Jeanie ! — Is that richt ? Ye maun think 
o't again — it's no richt," said Dumbiedikes, with a countenance of 
great concern. 

" If I were anes at Lunnon," said Jeanie, in exculpation, " I am 
amaist sure I could get means to speak to the queen about my 
sister's life." 

" Lunnon— and the queen — and her sister's life ! " said Dumbie- 
dikes, whistling for very amazement — " the lassie's demented." 

" I am no out o' my mind," said she, " and, sink or swim, I am 
determined to gang to Lunnon, if I suld beg my way frae door to 
door — and sol maun, unless ye wad lend me a small sum to pay my 
expenses — little thing will do it ; and ye ken my father's a man of 
substance, and wad see nae man, far less you, Laird, come to loss 
by me." 

Dumbiedikes, on comprehending the nature of this application, 
could scarce trust his ears — he made no answer whatever, but stood 
with his eyes riveted on the ground. 

" I see ye are no for assisting me, Laird," said Jeanie ; " sae fare 
ye weel — and gang and see my poor father as aften as ye can — he 
will be lonely eneugh now." 

" Where is the silly bairn gaun ? " said Dumbiedikes ; and, laying 
hold of her hand, he led her into the house. " It's no that 1 didna 
think o't before," he said, "but it stack in my throat." 

Thus speaking to himself, he led her into an old-fashioned par- 
lour, shut the door behind them, and fastened it with a bolt. While 
Jeanie, surprised at this manoeuvre, remained as near the door as 
possible, the Laird quitted her hand, and pressed upon a spring 
lock fixed in an oak panel in the wainscot, which instantly slipped 
aside. An iron strong-box was discovered in a recess of the 
wall ; he opened this also, and, pulling out two or three drawers, 
showed that they were filled with leathern bags, full of gold and 
silver coin. 

" This is my bank, Jeanie, lass," he said, looking first at her and 
then at the treasure, with an air of great complacency, — " nane o' 
your goldsmith's bills for me, — they bring folk to ruin." 

Then suddenly changing his tone, he resolutely said, — " Jeanie> 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 215. 

I will mak ye Lady Dumbiedikes afore the sun sets, and ye may 
ride to Lunnon in your ain coach, if ye like." 

" Na, Laird," said Jeanie, " that can never be — my father's grief" 
— my sister's situation — the discredit to you " 

"That 's my business," said Dumbiedikes ; " ye wad sae naething 
about that if ye werena a fule— and yet I like ye the better for't — . 
ae wise body's eneugh in the married state. But if your heart's- 
ower fu', tak what siller will serve ye, and let it be when ye come 
back again — as gude syne as suae." 

"But, Laird," said Jeanie, who felt the necessity of being explicit 
with so extraordinary a lover, " I like another man better than you, 
and I canna marry ye." 

" Another man better than me, Jeanie ! " said Dumbiedikes — 
" how is that possible ? — It's no possible, woman — ye hae ken'd me 
sae lang." 

"Ay but, Laird," said Jeanie, with persevering simplicity, " I hae 
ken'd him langer." 

"Langer! — It's no possible," exclaimed the poor Laird. "It 
canna be ; ye were born on the land. O Jeanie woman, ye haena 
lookit — ye haena seen the half o' the gear." He drew out another 
drawer — " A' gowd, Jeanie, and there 's bands, for siller lent — And 
the rental book, Jeanie — clear three hunder sterling — deil a wadset, 
heritable band, or burden — Ye haena lookit at them, woman — And 
then my mother's wardrobe, and my grandmother's forby — silk 
gowns wad stand on their ends, pearlin-lace as fine as spiders' 
webs, and rings and ear-rings to the boot of a' that — they are a' in 
the chamber of deas — Oh, Jeanie, gang up the stair and look at 
them!" 

But Jeanie held fast her integrity, though beset with temptations, 
which perhaps the Laird of Dumbiedikes did not greatly err in 
supposing were those most affecting to her sex. 

" It canna be, Laird — I have said-it — and I canna break my word 
till him, if ye wad gie me the haill barony of Dalkeith, and Lugton 
into the bargain." 

" Your word to him," said the Laird, somewhat pettishly ; " but 
wha is he, Jeanie ? — wha is he ? — I haena heard his name yet — 
Come now, Jeanie, ye are but queering us — I am no trowing that 
there is sic a ane in the warld — ye are but making fashion — What 
is he ? — wha is he ? " 

"Just Reuben Butler, that's schulemaster at Libberton," said 
Jeanie. 

" Reuben Butler ! Reuben Butler ! " echoed the Laird of Dum- 
biedikes, pacing the apartment in high disdain, — " Reuben Butler, 
the dominie at Libberton — and a dominie depute too ! — Reuben, 
the son of my cottar ! — Very weel, Jeanie lass, wilfu' woman wili 
hae her way — Reuben Butler ! he hasna in his pouch the value o' 
the auld. black coat he wears — but it disna signify." And, as he 
spoke, he shut successively and with vehemence, the drawers of his 
treasury. " A fair offer, Jeanie, is nae cause of feud — Ae man may 
bring a horse to the water, but twenty wunna gar him drink — And 
.as for wasting my substance on other folk's joes " 



ai6 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

There was something in the last hint that nettled Jeanie's honest 
pride. — " I was begging nane frae your honour," she said, " least of 
a' on sic a score as ye pit it on. — Gude morning to ye, sir ; ye hae 
been kind to my father, and it isna in my heart to think otherwise 
than kindly of you." 

So saying, she left the room without listening to a faint " But 
Jeanie— Jeanie — stay, woman ! " and traversing the court-yard with 
•a quick step, she set out on her forward journey, her bosom glowing 
with that natural indignation and shame, which an honest mind 
feels at having subjected itself to ask a favour, which had been un- 
expectedly refused. When out of the Laird's ground, and once more 
upon the public road, her pace slackened, her anger cooled, and 
anxious anticipations of the consequence of this unexpected disap- 
pointment began to influence her with other feelings. Must she then 
actually beg her way to London ? for such seemed the alternative ; 
-or must she turn back, and solicit her father for money ; and by 
doing so lose time, which was precious, besides the risk of encoun- 
tering his positive prohibition respecting her journey ? Yet she 
saw no medium between these alternatives ; and, while she walked 
•slowly on, was still meditating whether it were not better to return. 

While she was thus in an uncertainty, she heard the clatter of a 
horse's hoofs, and a well-known voice calling her name. She looked 
round, and saw advancing towards her on a pony, whose bare back 
..and halter assorted ill with the nightgown, slippers, and laced 
cocked-hat of the rider, a cavalier of no less importance than Dum- 
biedikes himself. In the energy of his pursuit, he had overcome 
even the Highland obstinacy of Rory Bean, and compelled that 
self-willed palfrey to canter the way his rider chose ; which Rory, 
.however, performed with all the symptoms of reluctance, turning 
.iiis head, and accompanying every bound he made in advance with 
a sidelong motion, which indicated his extreme wish to turn round, 
-■ — a manoeuvre which nothing but the constant exercise of the 
iLaird's heels and cudgel could possibly have counteracted. 

When the Laird came up with Jeanie, the first words he uttered 
were, — "Jeanie, they say ane shouldna aye tak a woman at her first 
word ? " 

"Ay, but ye maun tak me at mine, Laird," said Jeanie, looking 
on the ground, and walking on without a pause. — "I hae but ae 
word to bestow on onybody, and that's aye a true ane." 

" Then," said Dumbiedikes, " at least ye suldna ay tak a man at 
his first word. Ye maunna gang this wilfu' gate sillerless, come 
o 't what like." — He put a purse into her hand. " I wad gie you 
Rory too, but he's as wilfu' as yoursell, and he's ower weel used to 
a gate that maybe he and I hae gaen ower aften, and he'll gang nae 
road else." 

" But, Laird," said Jeanie, "though I ken my father will satisfy 
every penny of this siller, whatever there's o J t, yet I wadna like to 
borrow it frae ane that maybe thinks of something mair than the 
paying o \ back again." 

" There's just twenty-five guineas o't," said Dumbiedikes, with a 
gentle sigh, " and whether your father pays or disna pay, I mak 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 217 

ye free till't without another word. Gang where ye like — do what 
ye like — and marry a' the Butlers in the country gin ye like— And 
sae, gude-morning to you, Jeanie." 

" And God bless you, Laird, wi' mony a gude morning,'' said 
Jeanie, her heart more softened by the unwonted generosity of 
this uncouth character, than perhaps Butler might have approved, 
had he 1 known her feelings at that moment ; " and comfort, and 
the Lord's peace, and the peace of the world, be with you, if we 
suld never meet again !" 

Dumbiedikes turned and waved his hand ; and his pony, much 
more willing to return than he had been to set out, hurried him 
homewards so fast, that, wanting the aid of a regular bridle, as 
well as of saddle and stirrups, he was too much puzzled to keep his 
seat to permit of his looking behind, even to give the parting glance 
of a forlorn swain. I am ashamed to say, that the sight of a lover, 
run away with in nightgown and slippers and a laced hat, by a 
bare-backed Highland pony, had something in it of a sedative, 
even to a grateful and deserved burst of affectionate esteem. The 
figure of Dumbiedikes was too ludicrous not to confirm Jeanie in 
the original sentiments she entertained towards him. 

" He's a gude creature," said she, " and a kind — it's a pity he 
has sae willyard a powny." And she immediately turned her 
thoughts to the important journey which she had commenced, re- 
flecting with pleasure, that, according to her habits of life and of 
undergoing fatigue, she was now amply or even superfluously pro- 
vided with the means of encountering the expenses of the road, up 
and down from London, and all other expenses whatever. 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

What strange and wayward thoughts will slide 

Into a lover's head ; 
" O mercy ! " to myself I cried, 

" If Lucy should be dead ! " 

Wordsworth. 

In pursuing her solitary journey, our heroine, soon after passing 
the house of Dumbiedikes, gained a little eminence, from which, 
on looking to the eastward down a prattling brook, whose meanders 
were shaded with straggling willows and alder trees, she could see 
the cottages of Woodend and Beersheba, the haunts and habitation 
of her early life, and could distinguish the common on which she 
had so often herded sheep, and the recesses of the rivulet where 
she had pulled rushes with Butler, to plait crowns and sceptres 
for her sister Efne, then a beautiful but spoiled child, of about 
three years old. The recollections which the scene brought with 
them were so bitter, that, had she indulged them, she would have 
sate down and relieved her heart with tears. 

" But I ken'd," said Jeanie, when she gave an account of her 
pilgrimage, "that greeting would do but little good, and that it was 



218 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

mair beseeming to thank the Lord, that had showed me kindness 
and countenance by means of a man, that mony ca'd a Nabal and 
churl, but wha was free of his gudes to me, as ever the fountain 
was free of the stream. And I minded the Scripture about the 
sin of Israel at Meribah, when the people murmured, although 
Moses had brought water from the dry rock that the congrega- 
tion might drink and live. Sae, I wad not trust mysell with 
another look at puir Woodend, for the very blue reek that came 
out of the lum-head pat me in mind of the change of market 
days with us." 

In this resigned and Christian temper she pursued her journey, 
until she was beyond this place of melancholy recollections, and 
not distant from the village where Butler dwelt, which, with its old- 
fashioned church and steeple, rises among a tuft of trees, occu- 
pying the ridge of an eminence to the south of Edinburgh.. At a 
quarter of a mile's distance is a clumsy square tower, the residence 
of the Laird of Libberton, who, in former times, with the habits of 
the predatory chivalry of Germany, is said frequently to have 
annoyed the city of Edinburgh, by intercepting the supplies and 
merchandise which came to the town from the southward.! 

This village, its tower, and its church, did not lie precisely in 
Jeanie's road towards England ; but they were not much aside 
from it, and the village was the abode of Butler. She had resolved 
to see him in the beginning of her journey, because she conceived 
him the most proper person to write to her father concerning her 
resolution and her hopes. There was probably another reason 
latent in her affectionate bosom. She wished once more to see 
the object of so early and so sincere an attachment, before com- 
mencing a pilgrimage, the perils of which she did not disguise 
from herself, although she did not allow them so to press upon her 
mind as to diminish the strength and energy of her resolution. A 
visit to a lover from a young person in a higher rank of life than 
Jeanie's, would have had something forward and improper in its 
character. But the simplicity of her rural habits was unacquainted 
with these punctilious ideas of decorum, and no notion, therefore, 
of impropriety crossed her imagination, as, setting out upon a long 
journey, she went to bid adieu to an early friend. 

There was still another motive that pressed upon her mind with 
additional force as she approached the village. She had looked 
anxiously for Butler in the court-house, and had expected that 
certainly, in some part of that eventful day, he would have 
appeared to bring such countenence and support as he could give to 
his old friend, and the protector of his youth, even if her own 
claims were laid aside. 

She knew, indeed, that he was under a certain degree of re- 
straint ; but she still had hoped that he would have found means 
to emancipate himself from it, at least for one day. In short, the 
wild and wayward thoughts which Wordsworth has described as 
rising in an absent lover's imagination, suggested, as the only ex- 
planation of his absence, that' Butler must be very ill. And so 
much had this wrought on her imagination, that when she 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 219 

approached the cottage where her lover occupied a small apart- 
ment, and which had been pointed out to her by a maiden with a 
milk-pail on her head, she trembled at anticipating the answer she 
might receive on inquiring for him. 

Her fears in this case had, indeed, only hit upon the truth. 
Butler, whose constitution was naturally feeble, did not soon re- 
cover the fatigue of body and distress of mind which he had suf- 
fered, in consequence of the tragical events with which our 
narrative commenced. The painful idea that his character was 
breathed on by suspicion, was an aggravation to his distress. 

But the most cruel addition was the absolute prohibition laid by 
the magistrates on his holding any communication with Deans or 
his family. It had unfortunately appeared likely to them, that 
some intercourse might be again attempted with that family by 
Robertson, through the medium of Butler, and this they were 
anxious to intercept, or prevent if possible. The measure was not 
meant as a harsh or injurious severity on the part of the magis- 
trates ; but in Butler's circumstances, it pressed cruelly hard. He 
felt he must be suffering under the bad opinion of the person who 
was dearest to him, from an imputation of unkind desertion, the 
most alien to his nature. 

This painful thought, pressing on a frame already injured, 
brought on a succession of slow and lingering feverish attacks, 
which greatly impaired his health, and at length rendered him 
incapable even of the sedentary duties of the school, on which his 
bread depended. Fortunately, old Mr. Whackbairn, who was the 
principal teacher of the little parochial establishment, was sincerely 
attached to Butler. Besides that he was sensible of his merits and 
value as an assistant, which had greatly raised the credit of his 
little school, the ancient pedagogue, who ' had himself been tole- 
rably educated, retained some taste for classical lore, and would 
gladly relax, after the drudgery of the school was over, by conning 
over a few pages of Horace or Juvenal with his usher. A simi- 
larity of taste begot kindness, and accordingly he saw Butler's 
increasing debility with great compassion, roused up his own ener- 
gies to teaching the school in the morning hours, insisted upon 
his assistant's reposing himself at that period, and, besides, sup- 
plied him with such comforts as the patient's situation required, 
and his own means were inadequate to compass. 

Such was Butler's situation, scarce able to drag himself to the 
place where his daily drudgery must gain his daily bread, and 
racked with a thousand fearful anticipations concerning the fate of 
those who were dearest to him in the world, when the trial, and 
condemnation of Effie Deans put the copestone upon his mental 
misery. 

He had a particular account of these events from a fellow- 
student who resided in the same village, and who, having been 
present on the melancholy occasion, was able to place it in all its 
agony of horrors before his excruciated imagination. That sleep, 
should have visited his eyes after such a curfew-note, was impos- 
sible. A thousand dreadful visions haunted his imagination all 



220 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

night, and in the morning he was awakened from a feverish slum- 
ber, by the only circumstance which could have added to his dis- 
tress, — the visit of an intrusive ass. 

This unwelcome visitant was no other than Bartoline Saddle- 
tree. The worthy and sapient burgher had kept his appointment 
at MacCroskie's, with Plumdamas and some other neighbours, to 
discuss the Duke of Argyle's speech, the justice of Efne Deans' 
condemnation, and the improbability of her obtaining a reprieve. 
This sage conclave disputed high and drank deep, and on the next 
morning Bartoline felt, as he expressed it, as if his head was like a 
" confused progress of writs." 

To bring his reflective powers to their usual serenity, Saddletree 
resolved to take a morning's ride upon a certain hack, which he, 
Plumdamas, and another honest shopkeeper, combined to main- 
tain by joint subscription, for occasional jaunts for the purpose of 
business or exercise. As Saddletree had two children boarded 
with Whackbairn, and was, as we have seen, rather fond of Butler's 
society, he turned his palfrey's head towards Libberton, and came, 
as we have already said, to give the unfortunate usher that addi- 
tional vexation, of which Imogene complains so feelingly, when 
she says, 

" I'm sprighted with a fool — 
Sprighted and angered worse." 

If anything could have added gall to bitterness, it was the choice 
which Saddletree made of a subject for his prosing harangues, 
being the trial of Effie Deans, and the probability of her being 
executed. Every word fell on Butler's ear like the knell of a death- 
bell, or the note of a screech-owl. 

Jeanie paused at the door of her lover's humble abode upon 
hearing the loud and pompous tones of Saddletree sounding from 
the inner apartment, "Credit me, it will be sae, Mr. Butler. Brandy 
cannot save her. She maun gang down the Bow wi' the lad in the 
pioted coat * at her heels. — I am sorry for the lassie, but the law, 
sir, maun hae its course — 

' Vivat Rex, 
Currat Lex,' 

as the poet has it, in whilk of Horace's odes I know not." 

Here Butler groaned, in utter impatience of the brutality and 
ignorance which Bartoline had contrived to amalgamate into one 
sentence. But Saddletree, like other prosers, was blessed with a 
happy obtuseness of perception concerning the unfavourable im- 
pression which he sometimes made on his auditors. He proceeded 
to deal forth his scraps of legal knowledge without mercy, and 
concluded by asking Butler, with great self-complacency, " Was it 
na a pity my father didna send me to Utrecht? Havena I 
missed the chance to turn out as clarissimus an ictus, as auld 
Grunwiggin himsell ? — Whatfor dinna ye speak, Mr. Butler ? Wad 
I no hae been a clarissimus ictus? — Eh, man." 
" I really do not understand you, Mr. Saddletree," said Butler, 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 221 

thus pushed hard for an answer. His faint and exhausted tone of 
voice was instantly drowned in the sonorous bray of Bartoline. 

"No understand ^me, man? — Ictus is Latin for a lawyer, is 
it not ? " 

" Not that ever I heard of," answered Butler, in the same dejected 
tone. 

" The deil ye didna !— See, man, I got the word but this morn- 
ing out of a memorial of Mr. Crossmyloof's — see, there it is, ictus 
clarissimus et perti—peritissimus — it's a' Latin, for it's printed in 
the Italian types." 

" O, you mean juris-consultus — Ictus is an abbreviation for juris- 
consultus." 

" Dinna tell me, man," persevered Saddletree, " there's nae 
abbreviates except in adjudications ; and this is a' about a servi- 
tude of water-drap — that is to say, tillicidian * (maybe ye'll say 
that's no Latin neither,) in Mary King's Close in the High 
Street." 

" Very likely," said poor Butler, overwhelmed by the noisy per- 
severance of his visitor. " I am not able to dispute with you." 

" Few folk are — few folk are, Mr. Butler, though I say it, that 
shouldna say it," returned Bartoline, with great delight. " Now, it 
will be twa hours yet or ye're wanted in the schule, and as ye are 
no weel, I'll sit wi' you to divert ye, and explain t'ye the nature of 
a tillicidian. Ye maun ken, the petitioner, Mrs. Crombie, a very 
decent woman, is a friend of mine, and I hae stude her friend in 
this case, and brought her wi' credit into the court, and 1 doubtna 
that in due time she will win out o't wi' credit, win she or lose she. 
Ye see, being an inferior tenement or laigh house, we grant our- 
selves to be burdened wi' the tillicide, that is, that we are obligated 
to receive the natural water-drap of the superior tenement, sae far 
as the same fa's frae the heavens, or the roof of our neighbour's 
house, and from thence by the gutters or eaves upon our laigh tene- 
ment. But the other night comes a Highland quean of a lass, and 
she flashes, God kens what, out at the eastmost window of Mrs. 
MacPhail's house, that's the superior tenement. I believe the auld 
women wad hae agreed, for Luckie MacPhail sent down the lass to 
tell my friend Mrs. Crombie that she had made the gardyloo out of 
the wrang window, out of respect for twa Highlandmen that were 
speaking Gaelic in the close below the richt ane. But luckily for 
Mrs. Crombie, I just chanced to come in in time to break aff the 
communing, for it's a pity the point suldna be tried. We had 
Mrs. MacPhail into'the Ten-Mark Court— The Hieland limmer of 
a lass wanted to swear herself free — but haud ye there, says I " 

The detailed account of this important suit might have lasted 
until poor Butler's hour of rest was completely exhausted, had not 
Saddletree been interrupted by the noise of voices at the door. The 
woman of the house where Butler lodged, on returning with her 
pitcher from the well, whence she had been fetching water for the 
family, found our heroine Jeanie Deans standing at the door, im- 
patient of the prolix harangue of Saddletree, yet unwilling to enter 
until he should have taken his leave. 



222 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

The good woman abridged the period of hesitation by inquiring, 
" Was ye wanting the gudeman or me, lass ? " 

" I wanted to speak with Mr. Butler, if he's at leisure," replied 
Jeanie. 

" Gang in by then, my woman," answered the goodwife ; and 
opening the door of 'a room, she announced the additional visitor 
with, " Mr. Butler, here's a lass wants to speak t'ye." 

The surprise of Butler was extreme, when Jeanie, who seldom 
stirred half a mile from home, entered his apartment upon this 
annunciation. 

" Good God ! " he said, starting from his chair, while alarm re- 
stored to his cheek the colour of which sickness had deprived it ; 
" some new misfortune must have happened ! " 

" None, Mr. Reuben, but what you must hae heard of— but O, ye 
are looking ill yoursell ! " — for the " hectic of a moment " had not 
concealed from her affectionate eyes the ravages which lingering 
disease and anxiety of mind had made in her lover's person. 

" No : I am well — quite well," said Butler, with eagerness ; " if I 
can do anything to assist you, Jeanie — or your father." 

"Ay, to be sure," said Saddletree; "the family may be con- 
sidered as limited to them twa now, just as if Effie had never been 
in the tailzie, puir thing. But, Jeanie lass, what brings you out to 
Libberton sae air in the morning, and your father lying ill in the 
Luckenbooths?" 

" I had a message frae my father to Mr. Butler," said Jeanie, 
with embarrassment ; but instantly feeling ashamed of the fiction to 
which she had resorted, for her love of and veneration for truth was 
almost quaker-like, she corrected herself — " That is to say, I wanted 
to speak with Mr. Butler about some business of my father's and 
puir Effie's." 

" Is it law business ?" said Bartoline ; " because if it be, ye had 
better take my opinion on the subject than his." 

" It is not just law business," said Jeanie, who saw considerable 
inconvenience might arise from letting Mr. Saddletree into the 
secret purpose of her journey ; but I want Mr. Butler to writea. letter 
for me." 

" Very right," said Mr. Saddletree ; " and if ye'll tell me what it 
is about, I'll dictate to Mr. Butler as Mr. Croossmyloof does to his 
clerk. — Get your pen and ink in initialibus, Mr. Butler." 

Jeanie looked at Butler, and wrung her hands with vexation, and 
impatience. 

" I believe, Mr. Saddletree," said Butler, who saw the necessity 
of getting rid of him at all events, " that Mr. Whackbairn will be 
somewhat affronted, if you do not hear your boys called up to their 
lessons." 

'" Indeed, Mr. Butler, and that's as true ; and I promised to 
ask a half play-day to the schule, so that the bairns might gang 
and see the hanging, which canna but have a pleasing effect on 
their young minds, seeing there is no knowing what they may 
come to themselves. — Odd so, I didna mind ye were here, Jeanie 
Deans ; but ye maun use yoursell to hear the matter spoken o'.« • 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 223 

Keep Jeanie here till I come back, Mr. Butler ; I wunna bide ten 
minutes." 

And with this unwelcome assurance of an immediate return, he 
relieved them of the embarrassment of his presence. 

" Reuben," said Jeanie, who saw the necessity of using the in- 
terval of his absence in discussing what had brought her there, " I 
am bound on a lang journey — I am gaun to Lunnon to ask Erne's 
life of the king and of the queen." 

" Jeanie ! you are surely not yourself," answered Butler, in the 
utmost surprise ; "you go to London— -you address the king and 
queen ! " 

" And what for no, Reuben ? " said Jeanie, with all the composed 
simplicity of her character ; " it's but spealdng to a mortal man 
and woman when a' is done. And their hearts maun be made o' 
flesh and blood like ither folk's, and Effie's story wad melt them 
were they stane. Forby, I hae heard that they are no sic bad folk 
as what the Jacobites ca' them." 

"Yes, Jeanie," said Butler j "but their magnificence — their retinue 
— the difficulty of getting audience ? " 

" I have thought of a' that, Reuben, and it shall not break my 
spirit. Nae doubt their claiths will be very grand, wi' their crowns 
on their heads, and their sceptres in their hands, like the great King 
Ahasuerus when he sate upon his royal throne foment the gate of 
his house, as we are told in Scripture. But I have that within me 
that will keep my heart from failing, and I am amaist sure that I 
will be strengthened to speak the errand I came for." 

" Alas ! alas ! " said Butler, " the kings now-a-days do not sit in 
the gate to administer justice, as in patriarchal times. I know as 
little of courts as you do, J-eanie, by experience ; but by reading and 
report I know, that the King of Britain does everything by means 
of his ministers." 

"And if they be upright, God-fearing ministers," said Jeanie, "it's 
sae muckle the better chance for Effie and me." 

" But you do not even understand the most ordinary words re- 
lating to a court," said Butler; "by the ministry is meant not 
clergymen, but the king's official servants." 

" Nae doubt," returned Jeanie, " he maun hae a great number 
mair, I daur to say, than the duchess has at Dalkeith, and great 
folk's servants are aye mair saucy than themselves. But I'll be 
decently put on, and I'll offer them a trifle o' siller, as if I came to 
see the palace. Or, if they scruple that, I'll tell them I'm come on 
a business of life and death, and then they will surely bring me to 
speech of the king and queen ? " 

Butler shook his head. " O Jeanie, this is entirely a wild dream. 
You can never see them but through some great lord's intercession, 
and I think it is scarce possible even then." 

" Weel, but maybe, I can get that too," said Jeanie, " with a little 
helping from you." 

" From me, Jeanie ! this is the wildest imagination of all." 

" Ay, but it is not, Reuben. Havena I heard you say, that your 
grandfather (that my father never likes to hear about) did some 



224 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

gude langsyne to the forbear of this MacCallummore, when he was 
Lord of Lorn ? " 

" He did so," said Butler, eagerly, " and I can prove it.— I will 
write to the Duke of Argyle— report speaks him a good kindly man, 
as he is known for a brave soldier and true patriot — I will conjure 
him to stand between your sister and this cruel fate. There is but 
a poor chance of success, but we will try all means." 

" We must try all means," replied Jeanie ; " but writing winna do 
it — a letter canna look, and pray, and beg, and beseech, as the 
human voice can do to the human heart. A letter's like the music that 
the ladies have for their spinets — naething but black scores, com- 
pared to the same tune played or sung. It's word of mouth maun 
do it, or naething, Reuben." 

" You are right," said Reuben, recollecting his firmness, " and I 
will hope that Heaven has suggested to your kind heart and firm 
courage the only possible means of saving the life of this unfortu- 
nate girl. But, Jeanie, you must not take this most perilous journey 
alone ; I have an interest in you, and I will not agree that my 
Jeanie throws herself away. You must even, in the present cir- 
cumstances, give me a husband's right to protect you, and I will go 
with you myself on this journey, and assist you to do your duty by 
your family." 

"Alas, Reuben ! " said Jeanie in her turn, " this must not be ; a 
pardon will not gie my sister her fair fame again, or make me a bride 
fitting for an honest man and an usefu' minister. Wha wad mind 
what he said in the pu'pit, that had to wife the sister of a woman 
that was condemned for sic wickedness ! " 

" But, Jeanie," pleaded her lover, " I do not believe, and I cannot 
believe, that Effie has done this deed." 

" Heaven bless ye for saying sae, Reuben," answered Jeanie ; 
"but she maun bear the blame o't after all." 

',' But the blame, were it even justly laid on her, does not fall on 
you." 

" Ah, Reuben, Reuben," replied the young woman, " ye ken it is 
a blot that spreads to kith and kin. — Ichabod — as my poor father 
says — the glory is departed from our house ; for the poorest man's 
house has a glory, where there are true hands, a divine heart, and 
an honest fame — And the last has gane fra us a'." 

" But, Jeanie, consider your word and plighted faith to me ; and 
would you undertake such a journey without a man to protect you? 
■ — and who should that protecter be but your husband ? " 

" You are kind and good, 'Reuben, and wad take me wi' a' my 
shame, I doubtna. But ye canna but own that this is no time to 
marry or be given in marriage. Na, if that suld ever be, it maun 
be in another and a better season. — And, dear Reuben, ye speak of 
protecting me on my journey — Alas ! who will protect and take 
care of you ? — your very limbs tremble with standing for ten minutes 
on the floor ; how could you undertake a journey as far as Lunnon?" 

" But I am strong — I am well," continued Butler, sinking in his 
Eeat totally exhausted, " at least I shall be quite well to-morrow." 

" Ye see, and ye ken, ye maun just let me depart," said Jeanie, 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 225 

after a pause ; and then taking his extended hand, and gazing 
kindly in his face, she added, " It's e'en a grief the mair to me to 
see you in this way. But ye maun keep up your heart for Jeanie's 
sake, for if she isna your wife, she will never be the wife of living 
man. And now gie me the paper for MacCulIammore, and bid God 
speed me on my way." 

There was something of romance in Jeanie's venturous resolution; 
yet, on consideration, as it seemed impossible to alter it by per- 
suasion, or to give her assistance but by advice, Butler, after some 
further debate, put into her hands the paper she desired, which, 
with the muster-roll in which it was folded up, were the sole me- 
morials of the stout and enthusiastic Bible Butler, his grandfather. 
While Butler sought this document, Jeanie had time to take up his 
pocket Bible. " I have marked a scripture," she said, as she again 
laid it down, " with your kylevine pen, that will be useful to us baith. 
And ye maun tak the trouble, Reuben, to write a' this to my father, 
for, God help me, I have neither head nor hand for lang letters at 
ony time, forby now ; and I trust him entirely to you, and I trust 
you will soon be permitted to see him. And, Reuben, when ye do 
win to the speech o' him, mind a' the auld man's bits o' ways, for 
Jeanie's sake ; and dinna speak o' Latin or English terms to him, 
for he's o' the auld warld, and downa bide to be fashed wi' them, 
though I dare say he may be wrang. And dinna ye say muckle to 
him, but set him on speaking himsell, for he'll bring himsell mair 
comfort that way. And O, Reuben, the poor lassie in yon dungeon ! 
— but I needna bid your kind heart — gie her what comfort ye can 
as soon as they will let ye see her — tell her — But I maunna speak 
mair about her, for I maunna take leave o' ye wi' the tear in my ee, 
for that wadna be canny. — God bless ye, Reuben ! " 

To avoid so ill an omen she left the room hastily, while her 
features yet retained the mournful and affectionate smile which she 
had compelled them to wear, in order to support Butler's spirits. 

It seemed, as if the power of sight, of speech, and of reflection, 
had left him as she disappeared from the room, which she had 
entered and retired from so like an apparition. Saddletree, who 
entered immediately afterwards, overwhelmed him with questions, 
which he answered without understanding them, and with legal 
disquisitions, which conveyed to him no iota of meaning. At 
length the learned burgess recollected that there was a Baron 
Court to be held at Loanhead that day, and though it was hardly 
worth while, " he might as weel go to see if there was onything 
doing, as he was acquainted with the baron-bailie, who was a 
decent man, and would be glad of a word of legal advice." 

So soon as he departed, Butler flew to the Bible, the last book 
which Jeanie had touched. To his extreme surprise, a paper, con- 
taining two or three pieces of gold, dropped from the book. With 
a black-lead pencil, she had marked the sixteenth and twenty-fifth 
verses of the thirty-seventh Psalm, — " A little that a righteous man 
hath, is better than the riches of the wicked." — " I have been young 
and am now old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor 
his seed begging their bread." 



226 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

Deeply impressed with the affectionate delicacy which shrouded 
its own generosity under the cover of a providential supply to his 
wants, he pressed the gold to his lips with more ardour than ever 
the metal was greeted with by a miser. To emulate her devout 
firmness and confidence seemed now the pitch of his ambition, and 
his first task was to write an account to David Deans of his 
daughter's resdlution and journey southward. He studied every 
sentiment, and even every phrase, which he thought could recon- 
cile the old man to her extraordinary resolution. The effect which 
this epistle produced will be hereafter adverted to. Butler com- 
mitted it to the charge of an honest clown, who had frequent deal- 
ings with Deans in the sale of his dairy produce, and who readily 
undertook a journey to Edinburgh, to put the letter into his own 
hands* 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 



" My native land, good-night ! " 

Lord Byron. 

IN the present day, a journey from Edinburgh to London is a 
matter at once safe, brief, and simple, however inexperienced or 
unprotected the traveller. Numerous coaches of different rates of 
charge, and as many packets, are perpetually passing and re- 
passing betwixt the capital of Britain and her northern sister, so 
that the most timid or indolent may execute such a journey upon 
a few hours' notice. But it was different in 1737. So slight and 
infrequent was the intercourse betwixt London and Edinburgh, 
that men still alive remember that upon one occasion the mail 
from the former city arrived at the General Post-Office in Scot- 
land with only one letter in it.* The usual mode of travelling was 
by means of post-horses, the traveller occupying one, and his guide 
another, in which manner, by relays of horses from stage to stage, 
the journey might be accomplished in a wonderfully short time by 
those who could endure fatigue. To have the bones shaken to 
pieces by a constant change of those hacks was a luxury for the 
rich — the poor were under the necessity of using the mode of con- 
veyance with which nature had provided them. 

With a strong heart, and a frame patient of fatigue, Jeanie 
Deans, travelling at the rate of twenty miles a-day, and sometimes 
farther, traversed the southern part of Scotland, and advanced as 
far as Durham. 

Hitherto she had been* either among her own country-folk, or 
those to whom her bare feet and tartan screen were objects too fami- 
liar to attract much attention. But as she advanced, she perceived 
that both circumstances exposed Ker to sarcasm and taunts, which 
she might otherwise have escaped ; arid although in her heart she 
thought it unkind, and inhospitable, to sneer at a passing stranger, 
on account of the fashion of her attire, yet she had the good 
sense to alter those parts of her dress which attracted ill-natured 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 227 

observation. Her checqued screen was deposited carefully in her 
bundle, and she conformed to the national extravagance of wearing 
shoe's and stockings for the whole clay. She confessed afterwards, 
that, " besides the wastrife, it was lang or she could walk sae com- 
fortably with the shoes as without them ; but there was often a bit 
saft heather by the roadside, and that helped her weel on." The 
want of the screen, which was drawn over the head like a veil, she 
supplied by a bon-grace, as she called it ; a -large straw bonnet, like 
those worn by the English maidens when labouring in the fields. 
" But I thought unco shame o' mysell," she said, " the first time I 
put on a married woman's bon-grace, and me a single maiden." 

With these changes she had little, as she said, to make " her ken- 
speckle when she didna speak," but her accent and language drew 
down on her so many jests and gibes, couched in a worse patois by 
far than her own, that she soon, found it was her interest to talk as 
little and as seldom as possible. She answered, therefore, civil 
salutations of chance passengers with a civil curtsey, and chose, 
with anxious circumspection, such places of repose, as looked 
at once most decent and sequestered. She found the common 
people of England, although inferior in courtesy to strangers, such 
as was then practised in her own more unfrequented country, yet, 
upon the whole, by no means deficient in the real duties of hospi- 
tality. She readily obtained food, and shelter, and protection at a 
very moderate rate, which sometimes the generosity of mine host 
altogether declined, with a blunt apology, — " Thee hast a long way 
afore thee, lass ; and I'se ne'er take penny out o' a single woman's 
purse ; it's the best friend thou can ha^e on the road." 

It often happened, too, that mine hostess was struck with " the 
tidy, nice Scotch body," and procured her an escort, or a cast in a 
waggon, for some part of the way, or gave her a useful advice and 
recommendation respecting her resting-places. 

At York our pilgrim stopped for the best part of a day — partly 
to recruit her strength, — partly because she had the good luck to 
obtain a lodging in an inn kept by a countrywoman, — partly to 
indite two letters to her father and Reuben Butler ; an operation 
of some little difficulty, her habits being by no means those of 
literary composition. That to her father was in the following 
words : 

" Dearest Father, 
" I make my present pilgrimage more heavy and burdensome, 
through the sad occasion to reflect that it is without your know- 
ledge, which, God knows, was far contrary to my heart ; for Scrip- 
ture says, that ' the vow of the daughter should not be binding 
without the consent of the father,' wherein it may be I have been 
guilty to tak this wearie journey without your consent. Never- 
theless, it was borne in upon my mind that I should be an instru- 
ment to help my poor sister in this extremity of needcessity, 
otherwise I wad not, for wealth or for world's gear, or for the haill 
lands o' Da'keith and Lugton, have dune the like o' this, without 
your free will and knowledge. O dear father, as ye wad .desire a 

n 



228 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

blessing on my journey, and upon your household, speak a word 
or write a line of comfort to yon poor prisoner. If she has sinned, 
she has sorrowed and suffered, and ye ken better than me, that we 
maun forgifi others, as we pray to be forgien. Dear father, for- 
give my saying this muckle, for it doth not become a young head 
to instruct grey hairs ; but I am sae far frae ye, that my heart 
yearns to ye a', and fain wad I hear that ye had forgien her 
trespass, and sae I nae doubt say mair than may become me. 
The folk here are civil, and, like the barbarians unto the holy 
apostle, hae shewn me much kindness ; and there are a sort 
of chosen people in the land, for they hae some kirks without 
organs that are like ours, and are called meeting-houses, where the 
minister preaches without a gown. But most of the country are 
prelatists, whilk is awfu' to think; and I saw twa' men that were 
ministers following hunds, as bauld as Roslin or Driden, the young- 
Laird of Loup-the-dike, or ony wild gallant in Lothian. A sorrowfu' 
sicht to behold ! O dear father, may a blessing be with your doun- 
lying and up-rising, and remember in your prayers your affectionate 
daughter to command, -"Jean Deans." 

A postscript bore, " I learned from a decent woman, a grazier's 
widow, that they hae a cure for the muir-ill in Cumberland, whilk 
is ane pint, as they ca't, of yill, whilk is a dribble in comparison of 
our gawsie Scots pint, and hardly a mutchkin, boil'd wi' sope and 
hartshorn draps, and toomed doun the creature's throat wi' ane 
whom. Ye might try it on the bauson-faced year-auld quey ; an 
it does nae gude, it can do nae ill. — She was a kind woman, and 
seemed skeely about horned beasts. When I reach Lunnon, I 
intend to gang to our cousin Mrs. Glass, the tobacconist, at the 
sign o' the Thistle, wha is so ceevil as to send you doun your 
spleuchan-fu' anes a year ; and as she must be well ken'd in Lunnon, 
I doubt not easily to find out where she lives." ' 

Being seduced into betraying our heroine's confidence thus far, 
we will stretch our communication a step beyond, and impart to 
the reader her letter to her lover. 

" Mr. Reuben Butler, 
" Hoping this will find you better, this comes to say, that I have 
reached this great town safe, and am not wearied with walking, but 
the better for it. And I have seen many things which I trust to 
tell you one day, also the muckle kirk of this place ; and all around 
the city are mills, whilk havena muckle wheels nor mill-dams, but 
gang by the wind — strange to behold. Ane miller asked me to 
gang in and see it work, but I wad not, for I am not come to the 
south to make acquaintance with strangers. I keep the straight 
road, and just beck if onybody speaks to me ceevilly, and answers 
naebody with the tong but women of mine ain sect. I wish, Mr. 
Butler, I kend onything that wad mak ye weel, for they hae mair 
medicines in this town of York than wad cure a' Scotland, and 
surely some of them wad be gude for your complaints. If ye 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 229 

had a kindly motherly body to nurse ye, and no to let ye waste 
yoursell wi' reading — whilk ye read mair than eneugh wi' the 
bairns in the schule — and to gie ye warm milk in the morning, I 
wad be mair easy for ye. Dear Mr. Butler, keep a good heart, for 
we are in the hands of Ane that kens better what is gude for us 
than we ken what is for oursells. I hae nae doubt to do that for 
which I am come — I canna doubt it — I winna think to doubt it — 
because, if I haena full assurance, how shall I bear myself with 
earnest entreaties in the great folk's presence ? But to ken that 
ane's purpose is richt, and to make their heart strong, is the way to 
get through the warst day's darg. The bairns' rime says, the warst 
blast of the borrowing days * couldna kill the three silly poor hog- 
lams. And if it be God's pleasure, we that are sindered in sorrow 
may meet again in joy, even on this hither side of Jordan. I dinna 
bid ye mind what I said at our partin' arient my poor father and that , 
misfortunate lassie, for I ken you will do sae, for the sake of Chris- 
tian charity, whilk is mair than the entreaties of her that is your 
servant to command, " JEANIE DEANS." 

This letter also had a postscript. "Dear Reuben, If ye think 
that it wad hae been richt for me to have said mair and kinder 
things to ye, just think that I hae written sae, since I am sure that 
I wish a' that is kind and richt to ye and by ye. Ye will think I 
am turned waster, for I wear clean hose and shoon every day ; but 
it's the fashion here for decent bodies, and ilka land has its ain 
land-law. Ower and aboon a', if laughing, days were e'er to come 
back again till us, ye wad laugh weel to see my round face at the 
far end of a strae bon-grace, that looks as muckle and round as the 
middell aisle in Libberton Kirk. But it sheds the sun weel aff, and 
keeps unceevil folk frae staring as if ane were a worrycow.' I sail 
tell ye by writ how I come on wi' the Duke of Argyle, when I won 
up to Lunnon. Direct a line, to say how ye are, to me, to the 
charge of Mrs. Margaret Glass, tobacconist, at the sign of the 
Thistle, Lunnon, whilk, if it assures me of your health, will mak 
my mind sae muckle easier. Excuse bad spelling and writing, as 
I have ane ill pen." 

The orthography of these epistles may seem to the southron to 
require a better apology than the letter expresses, though a bad pen 
was the excuse of a certain Galwegian laird for bad spelling ; but, 
on behalf of the heroine, I would have them to know, that, thanks 
to the care of Butler, Jeanie Deans wrote and spelled fifty 
times better than half the women of rank in Scotland at that 
period, whose strange orthography and singular diction form the 
strongest contrast to the good sense which their correspondence 
usually intimates. 

For the rest, in the tenor of these epistles, Jeanie expressed, 
perhaps, more hopes, a firmer courage, and better spirits, than she 
actually felt. But this was with the amiable idea of relieving her 
father and lover from apprehensions on her account, which she 
was sensible must greatly add to their other troubles. " If they 



230 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

think me weel, and like to do weel," said the poor pilgrim to her- 
self, " my father will be kinder to Effie, and Butler will be kinder 
to himself. For I ken weel that they will think mair o' me than I 
do o' mysell." 

Accordingly, she sealed her letters carefully, and put them into 
the post-office with her own hand, after many inquiries concerning 
the time in which they were likely to reach Edinburgh. When 
this duty was performed, she readily accepted her landlady's 
pressing invitation to dine with her, and remain till the next 
morning. The hostess, as we have said, was her countrywoman, 
and the eagerness with which Scottish people meet, communicate, 
and, to the extent of their power, assist each other, although it is 
often objected to us as a prejudice and narrowness of sentiment, 
seems, on the contrary, to arise from a most justifiable and 
honourable feeling of patriotism, combined with a conviction, 
which, if undeserved, would long since have been confuted by 
experience, that the habits and principles of the nation are a sort 
of guarantee for the character of the individual. At any rate, if 
the extensive influence of this national partiality be considered as 
an additional tie, binding man to man, and calling forth the good 
offices of such as can render them to the countryman who happens 
to need them, we think it must be found to exceed, as an active 
and efficient motive to generosity, that more impartial and wider 
principle of general benevolence, which we have sometimes seen 
pleaded as an excuse for assisting no individual whatever. 

Mrs. Bickerton, lady of the ascendant of the Seven Stars, in 
the Castle-gate, York, was deeply infected with the unfortunate 
prejudices of her country. Indeed, she displayed so much kind- 
ness to Jeanie Deans (because she herself, being a Merse woman, 
marched with Mid- Lothian, in which Jeanie was born), showed such 
motherly regard to her, and such anxiety for her farther progress, 
that Jeanie thought herself safe, though by temper sufficiently 
cautious, in communicating her whole story to her. 

Mrs. Bickerton raised her hands and eyes at the .recital, and 
exhibited much wonder and pity. But she also gave some effectual 
good advice. 

She required to know the strength of Jeanie's purse, reduced by 
her deposit at Libberton, and the necessary expense of her journey, 
to about fifteen pounds. " This," she said, " would do very well, 
providing she would carry it a' safe to London. 1 ' 

" Safe ! " answered Jeanie ; " I'se warrant my carrying it safe, 
bating the needful expenses." 

" Ay, but highwaymen, lassie," said Mrs. Bickerton ; " for ye are 
come into a more civilized, that is to say, a more roguish country 
than the north, and how ye are to get forward, I do not profess to 
know. If ye could wait here eight days, our waggons would go 
up, and I would recommend you to Joe Broadwheel, who would 
see you safe to the Swan and two Necks. And dinna sneeze at 
Joe, if he should be for drawing up wi' you" (continued 
Mrs. Bickerton, her acquired English mingling with her national 
or original dialect), " he's a handy boy, and a wanter, and no lad 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 231 

better thought o' on the road ; and the English make good hus- 
oands enough, witness my poor man, Moses Bickerton, as is i' the 
kirkyard." 

Jeanie hastened to say, that she could not possibly wait for the 
setting forth of Joe Broadwheel ; being internally by no means 
gratified with the idea of becoming the object of his attention 
during the journey. 

" Aweel, lass," answered the good landlady, "then thou must pickle 
in thine ain poke-nook, and buckle thy girdle thine ain gate. But 
take my advice, and hide thy gold in thy stays, and keep a piece 
or two and some silver, in case thou be'st spoke withal ; for there's 
as wud lads haunt within a day's walk from hence, as on the braes 
of Doun in Perthshire. And, lass, thou maunna gang staring 
through Lunnon, asking wha kens Mrs. Glass at the sign o' the 
Thistle ; marry, they would laugh thee to scorn. But gang thou to 
this honest man," and she put a direction into Jeanie's hand, " he 
kens maist part of the sponsible Scottish folk in the city, and he 
will find out your friend for thee." 

Jeanie took the little introductory letter with sincere thanks ; 
but, something alarmed on the subject of the highway robbers, her 
mind recurred to what Ratcliffe had mentioned to her, and briefly 
relating the circumstances which placed a document so extra- 
ordinary in her hands, she put the paper he had given her into the 
hand of Mrs. Bickerton. 

The Lady of the Seven Stars did not, indeed, ring a bell, 
because such was not the fashion of the time, but she whistled 
on a silver-call, which was hung by her side, and a tight serving- 
maiden entered the room. 

" Till Dick Ostler to come here," said Mrs. Bickerton. 

Dick Ostler accordingly made his appearance ; — a queer, know- 
ing, shambling animal, with a hatchet-face, a squint, a game-arm, 
and a limp. 
. " Dick Ostler," said Mrs. Bickerton, in a tone of authority that 
showed she was (at least by adoption) Yorkshire too, "thou 
knowest most people and most things o' the road." 

" Eye, eye, God help me, mistress," said Dick, shrugging his 
shoulders betwixt a repentant and a knowing expression — " Eye ! 
I ha' know'd a thing or twa i' ma day, mistress." He looked sharp 
and laughed — looked grave and sighed; as one who was prepared 
to take the matter either way. 

"Kenst thou this wee bit paper amang the rest, man?" said 
Mrs. Bickerton, handing him the protection which Ratcliffe had 
given Jeanie Deans. 

When Dick had looked at the- paper, he winked with one eye, 
extended his grotesque mouth from ear to ear, like a navigable 
canal, scratched his head powerfully, and then said, " Ken ! —ay — 
maybe we ken summut, an it werena for harm to him, mistress." 

" None in the world," said Mrs. Bickerton ; " only a dram of 
Hollands to thyself, man, an thou will't speak." 

" Why, then," said Dick, giving the head-band of his breeches 
a knowing hoist with one hand, and kicking out one foot behind 



232 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

him to accommodate the adjustment of that important habiliment, 
" I dares to say the pass will be ken'd weel eneugh on the road, an 
that be all." 

" But what sort of a lad was he ? " said Mrs. Bickerton, winking 
to Jeanie, as proud of her knowing ostler. 

" Why, what ken I ? — Jim the Rat — why he was Cock o' the 
North within this twelmonth — he and Scotch Wilson, Handie 
Dandie, as they called him — but he's been out o' this country a 
while, as I rackon ; but ony gentleman, as keeps the road o' this 
side Stamford, will respect Jim's pass." 

Without asking further questions, the landlady filled Dick Ostler 
a bumper of Hollands. He ducked with his head and shoulders, 
scraped with his more advanced hoof, bolted the alcohol, to use the 
learned phrase, and withdrew to his own domains. 

" I would advise thee, Jeanie," said Mrs. Bickerton, " an thou 
meetest with ugly customers o' the road, to show them this bit 
paper, for it will serve thee, assure thyself." 

A neat little supper concluded the evening. The exported 
Scotswoman, Mrs. Bickerton by name, ate heartily of one or two 
seasoned dishes, drank some sound old ale, and a glass of stiff 
negus ; while she gave Jeanie a history of her gout, admiring how 
it was possible that she, whose fathers and mothers for many 
generations had been farmers in Lammermuir, could have come 
by a disorder so totally unknown to them. Jeanie did not choose 
to offend her friendly landlady, by speaking her mind on the pro- 
bable origin of this complaint ; but she thought on the flesh-pots 
of Egypt, and, in spite of all entreaties to better fare, made her 
evening meal upon vegetables, with a glass of fair water. 

Mrs. Bickerton assured her, that the acceptance of any reckon- 
ing was entirely out of the question, furnished her with credentials 
to her correspondent in London, and to several inns upon the road 
where she had some influence or interest, reminded her of the pre- 
cautions she should adopt for concealing her money, and as she 
was to depart early in the morning, took leave of her very affec- 
tionately, taking her word that she would visit her on her return to 
Scotland, and tell her how she had managed, and that summum 
bonum for a gossip, "all how and about it." This Jeanie faithfully 
promised. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

And Need and Misery, Vice and Danger, bind, 
In sad alliance, each degraded mind. 

As our traveller set out early on the ensuing morning to prose- 
cute her journey, and was in the act of leaving the inn-yard Dick 
Ostler, who either had risen early or neglected to go to bed, either 
circumstance being equally incident to his calling, hollowed out 
after her, — " The top of the morning to you, Moggie. Have a care 
o' Gunnerby Hill, young one. Robin Hood's dead and gwone, but 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 2.33 

theie be takers yet in the vale of Bever." Jeanie looked at him as 
if to request a farther explanation, but, with a leer, a shuffle, and a 
shrug, inimitable (unless by Emery), Dick turned again to the raw- 
boned steed which he was currying, and sung as he employed the 
comb and brush, — 

" Robin Hood he was a yeoman good, 
And his bow was of trusty yew ; 
And if Robin said stand on the King's lea-land 
Pray, why should not we say so too ? " 

Jeanie pursued her journey without further inquiry, for there was 
nothing in Dick's manner that inclined her to prolong their con- 
ference. A painful day's journey brought her to Ferrybridge, the 
best inn, then and since, upon the great northern road ; and an in- 
troduction from Mrs. Bickerton, added to her own simple and 
quiet manners, so propitiated the landlady of the Swan in her 
favour, that the good dame procured her the convenient accom- 
modation of a pillion and post-horse then returning to Tuxford, so 
that she accomplished, upon the second day after leaving York, the 
longest journey she had yet made. She was a good deal fatigued 
by a mode of travelling to which she was less accustomed than to 
walking, and it was considerably later than usual on the ensuing 
morning that she felt herself able to resume her pilgrimage. At 
noon the hundred-armed Trent, and the blackened ruins of Newark 
Castle, demolished in the great civil war, lay before her. It may 
easily be supposed, that Jeanie had no curiosity to make anti- 
quarian researches, but, entering the town, went straight to the inn 
to which she had been directed at Ferrybridge. While she pro- 
cured some refreshment, she observed the girl who brought it to 
her, looked at her several times with fixed and peculiar interest, 
and at last, to her infinite surprise, inquired if her name was not 
Deans, and if she was not a Scotchwoman, going to London upon 
justice business. Jeanie, with all her simplicity of character, had 
some of the caution'of her country, and, according to Scottish 
universal custom, she answered the question by another, requesting 
the girl would tell her why she asked these questions ? 

The Maritornes of the Saracen's Head, Newark, replied, " Two 
women had passed that morning, who had made inquiries after one 
Jeanie Deans, travelling to London on such an errand, and could 
scarce be persuaded that she had not passed on." 

Much surprised, and somewhat alarmed, (for what is inexplicable 
is usually alarming,) Jeanie^questioned the wench about the par- 
ticular appearance of these two women, but could only learn that 
the one was aged, and the other young ; that the latter was the 
taller, and that the former spoke most, and seemed to maintain an 
authority over her companion, and that both spoke with the 
Scottish accent. 

This conveyed no information whatever, and with an indescrib- 
able presentiment of evil designed towards her, Jeanie adopted 
the resolution of taking post-horses for the next s,tage. In this, 
however, she could not be gratified ; some accidental circumstances 



234 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

had occasioned what is called a run upon the road, and the land- 
' lord could not accommodate her with a guide and horses. After 
waiting some time, in hopes that a pair of horses that had gone 
southward would return in time for her use, she at length, feeling 
ashamed at her own pusillanimity, resolved to prosecute her journey- 
in her usual manner. 

" It was all plain road," she was assured, " except a high moun- 
tain, called Gunnerby Hill, about three miles from Grantham, 
which was her stage for the night." 

" I'm glad to hear there's a hill," said Jeanie, " for baith my 
sight and my very feet are weary o' sic tracts o' level grund— it 
looks a' the way between this and York as if a' the land had been 
trenched and levelled, whilk is very wearisome to my Scotch een. 
When I lost sight of a muckle blue hill they ca' Ingleboro', I 
thought I hadna a friend left in this strange land." 

" As for the matter of that, young woman," said mine host, " an 
you be so fond o' hill, I carena an thou couldst carry Gunnerby 
away with thee in thy lap, for it's a murder to post-horses. But 
here's to thy journey, and mayst thou win well through it, for thou 
is a bold and a canny lass." 

So saying, he took a powerful pull at a solemn tankard of home- 
brewed ale. 

" I hope there is nae bad company on the road, sir?" said 
Jeanie. 

" Why, when it's clean without them I'll thatch Groby pool wi' 
pancakes. But there arena sae mony now ; and since they hae 
lost Jim the Rat, they hold together no better than the men of 
Marsham when they lost their common. Take a drop ere thou 
goest," he concluded, offering her the tankard ; " thou wilt get nae- 
thing at night save Grantham gruel, nine grots and a gallon of 
water." 

Jeanie courteously declined the tankard, and inquired what was 
her " lawing " ? 

"Thy lawing ? Heaven help thee, wench ! what ca'st thou that?" 

" It is — I was wanting to ken what was to pay," replied Jeanie. 

" Pay ? Lord help thee — why nought, woman — we hae drawn 
no liquor but a gill o' beer, and the Saracen's Head can spare a 
mouthful o' meat to a stranger like o' thee, that cannot speak 
Christian language. So here's to thee once more. The same 
again, quoth Mark of .Bellgrave," and he took another profound pull 
at the tankard. 

The travellers who have visited Newark more lately, will not fail 
to remember the remarkably civil and gentlemanly manners of the 
person who now keeps the principal inn there, and may find some 
amusement in contrasting them with those of his more rough pre- 
decessor. But we believe it will be found that the polish has worn 
off none of the real worth of the metal. 

Taking leave of her Lincolnshire Gaius, Jeanie resumed her 
solitary walk, and was somewhat alarmed when evening and twi- 
light overtook her in the open ground which extends to the foot of 
Gunnerby Hill, and is intersected with patches of copse and with 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 235 

swampy spots. The extensive commons on the north road, most 
of which are now enclosed, and in general a relaxed state of police, 
exposed the traveller to a highway robbery in a degree which is 
now unknown, except in the immediate vicinity of the metropolis. 
Aware of this circumstance, Jeanie mended her pace when she 
heard the trampling of a horse behind, and instinctively drew to 
one side of the road, as if to allow as much room for the rider to 
pass as might be possible. When the animal came up, she found 
that it was bearing two women, the one placed on a side-saddle, the 
other on a pillion behind her, as may still occasionally be seen in 
England. 

" A braw good-nicht to ye, Jeanie Deans," said the foremost 
female as the horse passed our heroine ; " what think , ye o' yon 
bonny hill yonder, lifting its brow to the moon ? Trow ye yon's 
the gate to heaven, that ye are sae fain of? — maybe we will win 
there the nicht yet, God sain us, though our minny here's rather 
driegh in the upgang." 

The speaker kept changing her seat in the saddle, and half stop- 
ping the horse, as she brought her body round, while the woman 
that sat behind her on the pillion seemed to urge her on, in words 
which Jeanie heard But imperfectly. 

" Haud your tongue, ye moon-raised b ! what is your business 

with , or with heaven or hell either ? " 

" Troth, mither, no muckle wi' heaven, I doot, considering wha 
I carry ahint me — and as for hell, it will fecht its ain battle at its 
ain time, I'se be bound. — Come, naggie, trot awa', man, an as thou 
wert a broomstick, for a witch rides thee — 

' Wi' my curtch on my foot, and my shoe on my hand, 

I glance like the wildfire through brugh and through land.'" 

The tramp of the horse, and the increasing distance, drowned 
the rest-of her song, but Jeanie heard for some time the inarticulate 
sounds ring along the waste. 

Our pilgrim remained stupified with undefined apprehensions. 
The being named by her name in so wild a manner, and in a 
strange country, without farther explanation or communing, by a 
person who thus strangely flitted forward and disappeared before 
her, came near to the supernatural sounds in Comus : — 

" The airy tongues, which syllable men's names 
On sands, and shores, and desert wildernesses." 

And although widely different in features, deportment, and rank, 
.from the Lady of that enchanting masque, the continuation of the 
passage may be happily applied to Jeanie Deans .upon this singular 
alarm : — 

" These thoughts may startle well, but not astound 
The virtuous mind, that ever walks attended 
By a strong siding champion — Conscience." 

In fact, it was, with the recollection of the affectionate and duti- 
ful errand on which she was engaged, her right, if such a word 



236 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

could be applicable, to expect protection in a task so meritorious. 
She had not advanced much farther, with a mind calmed by these 
reflections, when she was disturbed by a new and more instant 
subject of terror. Two men, who had been lurking among some 
copse, started up as she advanced, and met her on the road in a 
menacing manner. " Stand and deliver," said one of them, a short 
stout fellow in a smock-frock, such as are worn by waggoners. 

"The woman," said the other, a tall thin figure, "does not 
understand the words of action. — Your money, my precious, or 
your life ! " 

" I have but very little money, gentlemen," said poor Jeanie, 
tendering that portion which she had separated from her principal 
stock, and kept apart for such an emergency ; " but if you are re- 
solved to have it, to be sure you must have it." 

" This won't do, my girl. D — n me, if it shall pass ! " said the 
shorter ruffian ; " do ye think gentlemen are to hazard their lives 
on the road to be cheated in this way ? We'll have every farthing 
you have got, or we will strip you to the skin, curse me." 

His companion, who seemed to have something like compassion 
for the horror which Jeanie's countenance now expressed, said, 
"No, no, Tom, this is one of the precious sisters, and we'll take her 
word, for once, without putting her to the stripping proof. — Hark 
ye, my lass, if you'll look up to heaven, and say, this is the last 
penny you have about ye, why, hang it, we'll let you pass." 

" I am not free," answered Jeanie, " to say what I have about 
me, gentlemen, for there's life and death depends on my journey ; 
but if you leave me as much as finds me bread and water, I'll be 
satisfied, and thank you, and pray for you." 

" D — n your prayers ! " said the shorter fellow, " that's a coin 
that won't pass with us ; " and at the same time he made a motion 
to seize her. 

" Stay, gentlemen," Ratcliffe's pass suddenly occurring to her ; 
" perhaps you know this paper." 

" What devil is she after ( now, Frank?" said the more savage 
ruffian — "Do you look at it, for, d — n me if I could read it if it 
were for the benefit of my clergy." 

" This is a jark from Jim Ratcliffe," said the taller, having looked 
at the bit of paper. " The wench must pass by our cutter's law." 

" I say no," answered his companion ; " Rat has left the lay, and 
turned bloodhound, they say." 

" We may need a good turn from him all the same," said the 
taller ruffian again. 

"But what are we to do then?" said the shorter man— "We 
promised, you know, to strip the wench, and send her begging 
tack to her own beggarly country, and now you are for letting her 
go on." 

" I did not say that," said the other fellow, and whispered to his 
companion, who replied, " Be alive about it then, and don't keep 
chattering till some travellers come up to nab us." 

"You must follow us off the road, young woman," said the 
taller. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 237 

" For the love of God ! " exclaimed Jeanie, " as you were born of 
woman, dinna ask me to leave the road ! rather take all I have in 
the world." 

"What the devil is the wench afraid of?" said the other fellow. 
" I tell you you shall come to no harm ; but if you will not leave 
the road and come with us, d — n me, but I'll beat your brains out 
where you stand." 

" Thou art a rough bear, Tom," said his companion. — " An ye 
touch her, I'll give ye a shake by the collar shall make the Leicester 
beans rattle in thy guts. — Never mind him, girl ; I will not allow 
him to lay a 'finger on you, if you walk quietly on with us ; but 
if you keep jabbering there, d — n me, but I'll leave him to settle it 
with you." 

This threat conveyed all that is terrible to the imagination of 
poor Jeanie, who saw in him that " was of milder mood " her only 
protection from the most brutal treatment. She, therefore, not only 
followed him, but even held him by the sleeve, lest he should' 
escape from her ; and the fellow, hardened as he was, seemed 
something touched by these marks of confidence, and repeatedly- 
assured her, that he would suffer her to receive no harm. 

They conducted their prisoner in a direction leading more and 
more from the public road, but she observed that they kept a sort 
of track or by-path, which relieved her from part of her apprehen- 
sions, which would have been greatly increased had they not 
seemed to follow a determined and ascertained route. After about 
half-an-hour's walking, all three in profound silence, they ap- 
proached an old barn, which stood on the edge of some cultivated 
ground, but remote from everything like a habitation. It was itself, 
however, tenanted, for there was light in the windows. , 

One of the footpads scratched at the door, which was opened by 
a female, and they entered with their unhappy prisoner. An old 
woman, who was preparing food by the assistance of a stifling fire 
of lighted charcoal, asked them, in the name of the devil, what they 
brought the wench there for, and why they did not strip her and 
turn her abroad on the common ?" 

" Come, come, Mother Blood," said the tall man, "we'll do what's 
right to oblige you, and we'll do no more ; we are bad enough, but 
not such as you would make us— devils incarnate." 

" She has got a jark from Jim Ratcliffe," said the short fellow, 
" and Frank here won't hear of our putting her through the mill." 

" No, that I will not, by G— d ! " answered Frank ; " but if old 
Mother Blood could keep her here for a little while, or send her 
back to Scotland, without hurting her, why, I see no harm in that 
—not I." 

" I'll tell you what, Frank Levitt," said the old woman, " if you 
call me Mother Blood again, I'll paint this gully " (and she held a 
knife up as if about to make good her threat) " in the best blood in 
your body, my bonny boy." 

" The price of ointment must be up in the north," said Frank, 
" that puts Mother Blood so much out of humour." 

Without a moment's hesitation the fury darted her knife at him 



238 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

with the vengeful dexterity of a wild Indian. As he was on his 
guard, he avoided the missile by a sudden motion of his head, but 
it whistled past his ear, and stuck deep in the clay wall of a parti- 
tion behind. 

" Come, come, mother," said the robber, seizing her by both 
wrists, " I shall teach you who's master;" and so saying, he forced 
the hag backwards by main force, who strove vehemently until she 
sunk on a bunch of straw, and then letting go her hands, he held 
up his finger towards her in the menacing posture by which a 
maniac is intimidated -by his keeper. It appeared to produce the 
desired effect ; for she did not attempt to, rise from the seat on 
which he had placed her, or to resume any measures of actual 
violence, but wrung her withered hands with impotent rage, and 
brayed and howled like a demoniac. 

" I will keep my promise with you, you old devil," said Frank ; 
" the wench shall not go forward on the London road, but I will not 
have you touch a hair of her head, if it were but for your insolence." 

This intimation seemed to compose in some degree the vehement 
passion of the old hag ; and while her exclamations and howls sunk 
into a low, maundering, growling tone of voice, another personage 
was added to this singular party. 

" Eh, Frank Levitt," said this new-comer, who entered with a 
hop, step, and jump, which at once conveyed her from the door 
into the centre of the party, " were ye killing our mother ? or were 
ye cutting the gruntei J s weasand that Tam brought in this morn- 
ing ? or have ye been reading your prayers backward, to bring up 
my auld acquaintance the deil amang ye ? " 

The tone of the speaker was so particular, that Jeanie immedi- 
ately recognized the woman who had rode foremost of the pair 
which passed her just before she met the robbers ; a circumstance 
which greatly increased her terror, as it served to show that the 
mischief designed against her was premeditated, though by whom, 
or for what cause, she was totally at a loss to conjecture. From the 
style of her conversation, the reader also may probably acknow- 
ledge in this female an old acquaintance in the earlier part of our 
narrative. 

" Out, ye mad devil ! " said Tom, whom she had disturbed in the 
middle of a draught of some liquor with which he had found means 
of accommodating himself ; " betwixt your Bess of Bedlam pranks 
and your dam's frenzies, a man might live quieter in the devil's ken 
than here." — And he again resumed the broken jug out of which he 
had been drinking. 

" And wha's this o't? " said the mad woman, dancing up to Jeanie 
' Deans, who, although- in great terror, yet watched the scene with a 
resolution to let nothing pass unnoticed which might be service- 
able in assisting her to escape, or informing her as to the true 
nature of her situation, and the danger attending it, — " Wha's this 
o't ? " again exclaimed Madge Wildfire. " Douce Davie Deans, the 
auld doited whig body's daughter, in a gipsy's barn, and the night 
setting in ! this is a sight for sair een ! — Eh, sirs, the falling off o' 
the godly ! — and the t'other sister's in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh ; 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 239 

I am very sorry for her, for my share — it's my mother wusses ill to 
her, and no me — though maybe I hae as muckle cause." 

" Hark ye, Madge," said the taller ruffian, " you have not such a 
touch of the devil's blood as the hag your mother, who may be his 
dam for what I know — take this young woman to your kennel, and 
do not let the devil enter, though he should ask in God's 
name." 

" Ou ay ; that I will, Frank," said Madge, taking hold of Jeanie 
by the arm, and pulling her along ; " for it's no for decent Christian 
young leddies, like her and me, to be keeping the like o' you and 
Tyburn Tam company at this time o' mcht. Sae gude-e'en to 'e, 
sirs, and mony o' them : and , may ye a' sleep till the hangman 
wauken ye, and then it will be weel for the country." 

She then, as her wild fancy seemed suddenly to prompt her, 
walked demurely towards her mother, who, seated by the charcoal 
fire, with the reflection of the red light on her withered and distorted 
features marked by every evil passion, seemed the very picture of 
Hecate at her infernal rites ; and suddenly dropping on her knees, 
said, with the manner of a six years' old child, " Mammie, hear me 
say my prayers before I go to bed, and say God bless my bonny 
face, as ye used to do lang syne." 

" The deil flay the hide o' it to sole his brogues wi' ! " said the old 
lady, aiming a buffet at the supplicant, in answer to her duteous 
request. 

The blow missed Madge, who, being probably acquainted by ex- 
perience with the mode in which her mother was wont to confer her 
maternal benedictions, slipt out of arm's length with great dex- 
terity and quickness. The hag then started up, and seizing a pair 
of old, fire-tongs, would have amended her motion, by beating out 
the brains either of her daughter or Jeanie, (she did not seem 
greatly to care which,) when her hand was once more arrested by 
the man whom they called Frank Levitt, who, seizing her by the 
shoulder, flung her from him with great violence, exclaiming, 
" What, Mother Damnable — again, and in my sovereign presence ! 
— Hark ye, Madge of Bedlam, get to your hole with your play- 
fellow, or we shall have the devil to pay here, and nothing to pay 
him with." 

Madge took Levitt's advice, retreating as fast as she could, and 
dragging Jeanie along with her into a sort of recess, partitioned off 
from the rest of the barn, and filled with straw, from which it ap- 
peared, that it was intended for the purpose of slumber. The 
moonlight shone, through an open hole, upon a pillion, a pack- 
saddle, and one or two wallets, the travelling furniture of Madge 
and her amiable mother. — " Now, saw ye e'er in your life," said 
Madge, " sae dainty a chamber of deas ? see as the moon shines 
doun sae caller on the fresh strae ! There's no a pleasanter cell in 
.Bedlam, for as braw a place as it is on the outside. — Were ye ever 
in Bedlam?" 

" No," answered Jeanie, faintly, appalled by the question, and 
the way in which it was put, yet willing to soothe her insane com- 
panion, being in circumstances so unhappily precarious, that even 



3+0 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

the society of this gibbering mad woman seemed a species of pro- 
tection. 

" Never in Bedlam ! " said Madge, as if with some surprise. — 
" But ye'll hae been in the cells at Edinburgh ? " 

" Never," repeated Jeanie. 

" Weel, I think thae daft carles the magistrates send naebody to 
Bedlam but me— thae maun hae an unco respect for me, for when- 
ever I am brought to them, they aye hae me back to Bedlam. But 
troth, Jeanie," (she said this in a very confidential tone,) " to tell ye 
my private mind about it, I think ye are at nae great loss ; for the 
keeper's a cross patch, and he maun hae it a' his ain gate, to be 
sure, or he make's the place waur than hell. I often tell him he's 
the daftest in a' the house — But what are they making sic a skirl- 
ing for ? — Deil ane o' them's get in here — it wadna be mensefu' ! 
I will sit wi' my back again the door ; it winna be that easy 
stirring me." 

" Madge ! "— " Madge ! "— " Madge Wildfire ! "— " Madge devil ! 
what have you done with the horse ? " was repeatedly asked by the 
men without. 

" He's e'en at his supper, puir thing," answered Madge; " deil an 
ye were at yours too, an it were scauding brimstane, and then we 
wad hae less o' your din." 

" His supper ! " answered the more sulky ruffian. — " What d'ye 
mean by that ? — Tell me where he is, or I will knock your Bedlam 
brains out ! " 

" He's in Gaffer Gabblewood's wheat-close, an ye maun ken." 

" His wheat-close, you crazed jilt ! " answered the other, with an 
accent of great indignation. 

" O, dear Tyburn Tarn, man, what ill will the blades of the young 
wheat do to the puir naig ? " 

" That is not the question," said the other robber ; " but what 
the country will say to us to-morrow, when they see him in such 
quarters. — Go, Tom, and bring him in ; and avoid the soft ground, 
my lad ; leave no hoof-track behind you." 

" I think you give me always the fag of it, whatever is to be 
done," grumbled his companion. 

" Leap, Laurence, you're long enough," said the other ; and the 
fellow left the barn accordingly, without further remonstrance. 

In the meanwhile, Madge had arranged herself for repose on the 
straw ; but still in a half-sitting posture, with her back resting 
against the door of the hovel, which, as it opened inwards, was in 
this manner kept shut by the weight of her person. 

" There's mair shifts by stealing, Jeanie," said Madge Wildfire ; 
" though whiles I can hardly get our mother to think sae. Wha 
wad hae thought but mysell of making a bolt of my ain back-bane ? 
But it's no sae strong as thae that I hae seen in the Tolbooth at 
Edinburgh. The hammermen of Edinburgh are to my mind afore 
the world for making stancheons, ring-bolts, fetter-bolts, bars, and 
locks. And they arena that bad at girdles for carcakes neither, though 
the Cu'ross hammermen have the gree for that. My mother had 
ance a bonny Cu'ross girdle, and I thought to have baked carcakes 




"I 

I 






THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 241 

on it for my puir wean that's dead and gane nae fair way— but we 
maun a' dee, ye ken, Jeanie — You Cameronian bodies ken that 
brawlies ; and ye're for making a hell upon earth that ye may be 
less unwilling to part wi' it. But as touching Bedlam that ye were 
. speaking about, I'se ne'er recommend it muckle the tae gate or the 
ither, be it richt — be it'wrang. But ye ken what the sang says." 
And, pursuing the unconnected and floating wanderings of her 
mind, she sang aloud — 

" In the bonny cells 'of Bedlam, 

Ere I was ane and twenty, 
I had hempen bracelets strong, 
And merry whips, ding-dong, 

And prayer and fasting plenty." 

" Weel, Jeanie, I am something herse the nicht, and I canna sing 
muckle majr ; and troth, I think, I am gaun to sleep." 

She dropped her head on her breast, a posture from which Jeanie, 
who would have given the world for an opportunity of quiet to con- 
sider the means and the probability of her escape, was very careful 
not to disturb her. After nodding, however, for a minute or two, 
with her eyes half closed, the unquiet and restless spirit of her 
malady again assailed Madge. She raised her head, and spoke, 
but with a lowered tone, which was again gradually overcome by 
drowsiness, to which the fatigue of a day's journey on horseback 
had probably given unwonted occasion, — " I dinna ken what maks 
me sae sleepy — I amaist never sleep till my bonny Lady Moon 
gangs till her bed — mair by token, when she's at the full, ye ken, 
rowing aboon us yonder in her grand silver coach — I hae danced 
to her my lane sometimes for very joy — and whiles dead folk came 
and danced wi' me — the like o' Jock Porteous, or ony body I had 
ken'd when I was living — for ye maun ken I was ance dead my- 
sell." Here the poor maniac sung in a low and wild tone, 

" My banes are buried in yon kirkyard 

Sae far ayont the sea, 
And it is but my blithesome ghaist 
That's speaking now to thee. 

" But, after a', Jeanie, my woman, naebodykens weel wha's living 
and wha's dead — or wha's gane to Fairyland — there's another ques- 
tion. Whiles I think my puir bairn's dead — ye ken very weel it's 
buried — but that signifies nothing. I have had it on my knee a 
hundred times, and a hundred till that, since it was buried — and 
how could that be were it dead, ye ken ; — it's merely impossible." — 
And here, some conviction half-overcoming the reveries of her 
imagination, she burst into a fit of crying and ejaculation, " Wae's 
me ! wae's me ! wae's me ! " till at length she moaned and sobbed 
herself into a deep sleep, which was soon intimated by her breath- 
ing hard, leaving Jeanie to her own melancholy reflections and 
observations. 



243 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

Bind her quickly ; or, by this steel, 

I'll tell, although I truss for company. Fletcher. 

The imperfect light which shone into the window enabled Jeanie 
to see that there was scarcely any chance of making her escape in 
that direction ; for the aperture was high in the wall, and so narrow, 
that, could she have climbed up to it, she might well doubt whether 
it would have permitted her to pass her body through it. An un- 
successful attempt to escape would be sure to draw down worse 
treatment than she now received, and she, therefore, resolved to 
watch her opportunity carefully ere making such a perilous effort. 
For this purpose she applied herself to the ruinou,s clay partition, 
which divided the hovel in which she now was from the rest of the 
waste barn. It was decayed and full of cracks and chinks, one of 
which she enlarged with her fingers, cautiously and without noise, 
until she could obtain a plain view of the old hag and the taller 
i-affian, whom they called Levitt, seated together beside the decayed 
fire of charcoal, and apparently engaged in close conference. She 
was at 'first terrified by the sight, for the features of the old woman 
had a hideous cast of hardened and inveterate malice and ill- 
humour, and those of the man, though naturally less unfavour- 
able, were such as corresponded well with licentious habits and a 
lawless profession. 

" But I remembered," said Jeanie, "my worthy father's tales of a 
winter evening, how he was confined with the blessed martyr Mr. 
James Renwick, who lifted up the fallen standard of the true re- 
formed Kirk of Scotland, after the worthy and renowned Daniel 
Cameron, our last blessed banner-man, had fallen among the 
swords of the wicked at Airsmoss, and how the very hearts of the 
wicked malefactors and murderers, whom they were confined 
withal, were melted like wax at the sound of their doctrine : and I 
bethought mysell, that the same help that was wi' them in their 
straiht, wad be wi' me in mine, an I could but watch the Lord's 
time and opportunity for delivering my feet from their snare ; and 
I minded the Scripture of the blessed Psalmist, whilkhe insisteth 
on, as weel in the forty-second as in the forty-third psalm', ' Why 
art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within 
me ? Hope in God, for I shall yet praise Him, who is the health 
of my countenance, and my God.' " 

Strengthened in a mind naturally calm, sedate, and firm, by the 
influence of religious confidence, this poor captive was enabled to 
attend to, and comprehend, a great part of an interesting conversa- 
tion which passed betwixt those into whose hands she had fallen, 
notwithstanding that their meaning was partly disguised by the 
occasional use of cant terms, of which Jeanie knew not the import, 
by the low tone in which they spoke, and by their mode of supply- 
ing their broken phrases by shrugs and signs, as is usual amongst 
those of their disorderly profession. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 243 

The man opened the conversation by saying, " Now, dame, you 
see I am true to my friend. I have not forgot that you planked a 
ckury,* which helped me through the bars of the Castle of York, 
and I came to do your work without asking questions, for one good 
turn deserves another. But now that Madge, who is as loud as 
Tom of Lincoln, is somewhat still, and this same Tyburn Neddie is 
shaking his heels after the old nag, why, you must tell me what all 
this is about, and what's to be done — for d — n me if I touch 
the girl, or let her be touched, and she with Jim Rat's pass 
too." 

" Thou art an honest lad, Frank," answered the old woman, 
"but e'en too kind for thy trade ; thy tender heart will get thee into 
trouble. I will see ye gang up Holborn Hill backward, and a' on 
the word of some silly loon that could never hae rapped to ye had 
ye drawn your knife across his weasand." 

" You may be baulked there, old one," answered the robber ; " I 
have known many a pretty lad cut short in his first summer upon the 
road, because he was something hasty with his flats and sharps. 
Besides, a man would fain live out his two years with a good con- 
science. So, tell me what all this is about, and what's to be done for 
you, that one can do decently?" 

"Why, you must know, 'Frank — but first taste a snap of right 
Hollands." She drew a flask from her pocket, and filled the fellow 
a large bumper, which he pronounced to be the right thing. — " You 
must know then, Frank — wunna ye mend your hand ? " again offer- 
ing the flask. 

" No, no — when a woman wants mischief from you, she always 
begins by filling you drunk. D — n all Dutch' courage. What I do 
I will do soberly — I'll last the longer for that too.-" 

" Well, then, you must know," resumed the old woman, without any 
farther attempts at propitiation, ' : that this girl is going to London." 

Here Jeanie could only distinguish the word sister. 

The robber answered in a louder tone, " Fair enough that ; and 
jvhat the devil is your business with it ? " 

" Business, enough, I think. If the b — queers the noose, that 
silly cull will marry her." 

" And who cares if he does ? " said the man. 

" Who cares, ye donnard Neddie'! I care; and I will strangle 
her with my own hands, rather than she should come to Madge's 
preferment." 

" Madge's preferment ! Does your old blind eyes see no farther 
than that ? If he is as you say, d'ye think he'll ever marry a moon- 
calf like Madge ? Ecod, that's a good one — Marry Madge Wild- 
fire !— Ha ! ha ! ha !" 

" Hark ye, ye crack-rope padder, born beggar, and bred thief ! " 
replied the hag, " suppose he never marries the wench, is that a 
reason he should marry another, and that other to hold my daugh- 
ter's place, and she crazed, and I a beggar, and all along of him ? 
But I know that of him will hang him — I know that of him will hang 
him, if he had a thousand lives — I know that of him will hang — • 
hang — hang him ! " 

Q 2 



244 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

She grinned as she repeated and dwelt upon the fatal monosyl- 
lable, with the emphasis of a vindictive fiend. 

" Then, why don't you hang— hang— hang him !" said Frank, re- 
peating her words contemptuously. " There would be more sense 
in that, than in wreaking yourself here upon two wenches that 
have done you and your daughter no ill." 

" No ill? " answered the old woman—" and he to marry this jail- 
bird, if ever she gets her foot loose !" 

" But as there is no chance of his marrying a bird of your brood, 
I cannot, for my soul, see what you have to do with all this," again 
replied the robber, shrugging his shoulders. " Where there is 
aught to be got, I'll go as far as my neighbours, but I hate mischief 
for mischiefs sake." 

" And would you go nae length for revenge ? " said the hag — 
" for revenge, the sweetest morsel to the mouth that ever was cooked 
in hell ! " 

"The devil may keep it for his own eating, then," said the 
robber ; " for hang me if I like the sauce he dresses it 
with." 

" Revenge ! " continued the old woman ; " why it is the best 
reward the devil gives us for our time here and hereafter. I have 
wrought hard for it — I have suffered for it, and I have sinned for 
it — and I will have it, — or there is neither justice in heaven nor in 
hell ! " 

Levitt had by this time lighted a pipe, and was listening with 
great composure to the frantic and vindictive ravings of the old hag. 
He was too much hardened by his course of life to be shocked with 
them — too indifferent, and probably too stupid, to catch any part 
of their animation or energy. " But, mother," he said, after a pause, 
" still I say, that if revenge is your wish, you should take it on the 
young fellow himself." 

" I wish I could," she' said, drawing in her breath, with the eager- 
ness of a thirsty person while mimicking the action of drinking — 
" I wish I could — but no — I cannot — I cannot." 

" And why not ? — You would think little of peaching and hang- 
ing him for this Scotch affair. — Rat me, one might have milled the 
Bank of England, and less noise about it." 

" I have nursed him at this withered breast," answered the old 
woman, folding her hands on her bosom, as if pressing an infant to 
it, "and though he has proved an adder to me — though he has been 
the destruction of me and mine — though he has made me company 
for the devil, if there be a devil, and food for hell, if there be such a 
place, yet I cannot take his life. — No, I cannot," she continued, 
with an appearance of rage against herself; " I have thought of it 
— I have tried it — but, Francis Levitt, I canna gang through wi't — 
Na, na — he was the first baim I ever nurst — ill I had been — and 
man can never ken what woman feels for the bairn she has held 
first to her bosom ! " 

"To be sure," said Levitt, "we have no experience. But, 
mother, they say you han't been so kirtd to other bairns, as you call 
them, that have come in your way. — Nay, d — n me, never lay your 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 245 

hand on the whittle, for I am captain and leader here, and I will 
have no rebellion." 

The hag, whose first motion had been, upon hearing the question, 
to grasp the haft of a large knife, now unclosed her hand, stole it 
away from the weapon, and suffered it to fall by her side, while she 
proceeded with a sort of smile — " Bairns ! ye are joking, lad, wha 
wad touch bairns ? Madge, puir thing, had a misfortune wi' ane — 
and the t'other" — Here her voice sunk so much, that Jeanie, though 
anxiously upon the watch, could not catch a word she said, until 
she raised her tone at the conclusion of the sentence — " So Madge, 
in her damn', threw it into the Nor'-Loch, I trow." 

Madge, . whose slumbers, like those of most who labour under 
mental malady, had been short, and were easily broken, now made 
herself heard from her place of repose. 

" Indeed, mother, that's a great lee, for I did nae sic 
thing." 

" Hush, thou hellicat devil," said her mother—" By Heaven ! the 
other wench will be waking too ! " 

" That may be dangerous," said Frank ; and he rose and followed 
Meg Murdockson across the floor. 

" Rise," said the hag to her daughter, " or I sail drive the knife 
between the planks into the Bedlam back of thee ! " 

Apparently she at the same time seconded her threat by pricking 
her with the point of a knife, for Madge, with a faint scream, 
changed her place, and the door opened. 

The old woman held a candle in one hand, and a knife in the 
other. Levitt appeared behind her, whether with a view of prevent- 
ing, or assisting her in any violence she might meditate, could not 
be well guessed. Jeanie's presence of mind stood her friend in this 
dreadful crisis. She had resolution enough to maintain the attitude 
and manner of one who sleeps profoundly, and to regulate even her 
breathing, notwithstanding the agitation of instant terror, so as to 
correspond with her attitude. 

The old woman passed the light across her eyes ; and although 
Jeanie's fears were so powerfully awakened by this movement, that 
" she often declared afterwards, that she thought she saw the figures 
of her destined murderers through her closed eyelids, she had still 
the resolution to maintain the feint on which her safety perhaps 
■depended. 

Levitt looked at her with fixed attention ; he then turned the old 
woman out of the place, and followed her himself. Havingregained 
the outward apartment, and seated themselves, Jeanie heard the 
highwayman say, to her no small relief, " She's as fast as if she 
were in Bedfordshire. — Now, old Meg, d — nme, if I can understand 
a glim of this story of yours, or what good it will do you to hang 
the one wench, and torment the other ; but, rat me, I will be true 
to my friend, and serve ye the way ye like it. I see it will be a bad 
job ; but I do think I could get her down to Surfleet on the Wash, 
and so on boarfl Tom Moonshine's neat lugger, and keep her out 
of the way three or four weeks, if that will please ye — But d — n me 
if any one shall harm her, unless they have a mind to choke on n. 



246 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

brace of blue plums. — It's a cruel bad job, and I wish you and it, 
Meg, were both at the devil." 

" Never mind, hinny Levitt," said the old woman ; " you are a 
ruffler, and will have a' your ain gate — She shanna gang to 
heaven an hour sooner for me ; I carena whether she live or die — 
it's her sister — ay, her sister ! " 

" Well, we'll say no more about it, I hear Tom coming in. We'll 
couch a hpgshead* and so better had you." They retired to repose, 
accordingly, and all was silent in this asylum of iniquity. 

Jeanie lay for a long time awake. At break of day she heard 
the two ruffians leave the barn, after whispering with the old woman 
for some time. The sense that she was now guarded only by per- 
sons of her own sex gave her some confidence, and irresistible lassi- 
tude at length threw her into slumber. 

When the captive awakened, the sun was high in heaven, and the 
morning considerably advanced. Madge Wildfire was still in the 
hovel which had served them for the night, and immediately bid 
her good-morning, with her usual air of insane glee. " And d'ye 
ken, lass," said Madge, " there's queer things chanced since ye hae 
been in the land of Nod. The constables hae been here, woman, 
and they met wi' my minnie at the door, and they whirl'd her awa to 
the Justice's about the man's wheat. — Dear ! thae English churls 
think as muckle about a blade of wheat or grass, as a Scotch laird 
does about his maukins and his muir-poots. Now, lass, if ye like, 
we'll play them a fine jink ; we will awa out and tak a walk — they 
will make unco wark when they miss us, but we can easily be back 
by dinner time, or before dark nicht at ony rate, and it will be some 
frolic and fresh air. — But maybe ye wad like to tak some breakfast, 
and then lie doun again ? I ken by mysell, there's whiles I can sit 
wi' my head in my hand the haill day, and havena a word to cast 
at a dog — and other whiles, that I canna sit still a moment. That's 
when the folk think me warst, but I am aye canny eneugh — ye 
needna be feared to walk wi' me." 

Had Madge Wildfire been the most raging lunatic, instead of pos- 
sessing a doubtful, uncertain, and twilight sort of rationality, vary- 
ing, probably, from the influence of the most trivial causes, Jeanie 
would hardly have objected to leave a place of captivity where she 
had so much to apprehend. She eagerly assured Madge that she 
had no occasion for farther sleep, no desire whatever for eating; 
and hoping internally that she was not guilty of sin in doing so, she 
flattered her keeper's crazy humour for walking in the woods. 

" It's no a'thegither for that neither," said poor Madge ; "but I am 
judging ye will wun the better out o' thae folk's hands ; no that 
they are a'thegither bad folk neither, but they have queer ways wi' 
them, and I whiles dinna think it has been ever weel wi' my mother 
and me since we kept sic-like company." 

With the haste, the joy, the fear, and the hope of a liberated 
captive, Jeanie snatched up her little bundle, followed Madge into 
the free air, and eagerly looked round her for a human habitation ; 
but none was to be seen. The ground was partly cultivated, and 
partly left in its natural state, according as the fancy of the . 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 247 

slovenly agriculturists had decided. In its natural state it was 
waste, in some places covered with dwarf trees and bushes, in 
others swamp, and elsewhere firm and dry downs or pasture 
grounds. 

Jeanie's active mind next led her to conjecture which way the 
high-road lay, whence she had been forced. If she regained that 
public road, she imagined she must soon meet some person, or 
arrire at some house, where she might tell her story, and request 
protection. But after a glance around her, she saw with regret 
that she had no means whatever of directing her course with any 
degree of certainty, and that she was still in dependence upon her 
crazy companion. " Shall we not walk upon the high-road ? " said 
she to Madge, in such a tone as a nurse uses to coax a child. " It's 
brawer walking on the road than amang thae wild bushes and 
whins." 

Madge, who was walking very fast, stopped at this question, and 
looked at Jeanie with a sudden and scrutinizing glance, that seemed 
to indicate complete acquaintance with her purpose. " Aha, lass !" 
sh; exclaimed, "are ye gaun to guide us that gate? — Yell be for 
making your heels save your head, I am judging." 

Jeanie hesitated for a moment, on hearing her companion thus 
express herself, whether she had not better take the hint, and try 
to outstrip and get rid of her. But she knew not in which direc- 
tion to fly ; she was by no -means sure that she would prove the 
swiftest, and perfectly conscious that, in the event, of her being 
pursued and overtaken, she would be inferior to the madwoman in 
strength. She therefore gave up thoughts for the present of 
attempting to escape in that manner, and, saying a few words to 
allay Madge's suspicions, she followed in anxious apprehension the 
■wayward, path by which her guide thought proper to lead her. 
Madge, infirm of purpose, and easily reconciled to the present 
scene, whatever it was, began soon to talk with her usual diffuseness 
of ideas. 

" It's a dainty thing to be in the woods on a fine morning like 
this — I like it far better than the toun, for there isna a wheen 
duddie bairns to be crying after ane, as if ane were a warld's 
wonder, just because ane maybe is a thought bonnier and better 
put-on than their neighbours — though, Jeanie, ye suld never be 
proud o' braw claiths, or beauty neither — wae's me ! they're but a 
snare. I anes thought better o' them, and what cam o't ? " 

" Are ye sure ye ken the way ye are takin us ? " said Jeanie, who 
began to imagine that she was getting deeper into the woods and 
more remote from the high-road. 

" Do I ken the road ? — Wasna I mony a day living here, and 
whatfor shouldna I ken the road ? — I might hae forgotten, too, for 
it was afore my accident ; but there are some things ane can never 
forget, let them try it as muckle as they like." 

By this time they had gained the deepest part of a patch of 
woodland. The trees were a little separated from each other, 
and at the foot of one of them, a beautiful poplar, was a hillock 
of moss, such as the poet of Grasmere has described. So soon as 



248 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

she arrived at this spot, Madge Wildfire, joining her hands above 
her head, with a loud scream that resembled laughter, flung herself 
all at once upon the spot, and remained lying there motionless. 

Jeanie's first idea was to take the opportunity of flight ; but her 
desire to escape yielded for a moment to apprehension for the poor 
insane being, who, she thought, might perish for want of relief. 
With an effort, which, in her circumstances, might be termed 
heroic, she stooped down, spoke in a soothing tone, and endeavoured 
to raise up the forlorn creature. She effected this with difficulty, 
and, as she placed her against the tree in a sitting posture, she 
observed with surprise, that her complexion, usually florid, *as 
now deadly pale, and that her face was.bathed in tears. Notwith- 
standing her own extreme danger, Jeanie was affected by the 
situation of her companion ; and the rather, that through the 
whole train of her wavering and inconsistent state of mind aid 
line of conduct, she discerned a general colour of kindness towards 
herself, for which she felt gratitude. 

" Let me alane ! — let me alane ! " said the poor young woman, 
as her paroxysm of sorrow began to abate — " Let me alane — :'t 
does me good to weep. I canna shed tears but maybe anes or 
twice a-year, and I aye come to ,wet this turf with them, that tie 
flowers may grow fair, and the grass may be green." 

" But what is the matter with you? " said Jeanie — " Why do you 
weep so bitterly ? " j 

"There's matter enow," replied the lunatic, — "mair than aej 
puir mind can bear, I trow. Stay a bit, and I'll tell you a' about 
it ; for I like ye, Jeanie Deans — a'body spoke weel about ye whenj 
we lived in the Pleasaunts — And I mind aye the drink o' milk yej 
gae me yon day, when I had been on Arthur's Seat for four-and-J 
twenty hours, looking for the ship that somebody was sailing in." 

These words recalled to Jeanie's recollection, that, in fact, she 
had been one morning much frightened by meeting a crazy young 
woman near her father's house at an early hour, and that as she i 
appeared to be harmless, her apprehension had been changed into 
pity, and she had relieved the unhappy wanderer with some food, I 
which she devoured with the haste of a famished person. The 
incident, trifling in itself, was at present of great importance, if it 
should be found to have made a favourable and permanent im- 
pression in her favour on the mind of the object of her charity. 

" Yes," said Madge, " I'll tell ye a' about it, for ye are a decent 
man's daughter — Douce Davie Deans, ye ken — and maybe ye'll 
can teach me to find out the narrow way, and the straight path, 
for I have been burning bricks in Egypt, and walking through the 
weary wilderness of Sinai, for lang and mony a day. But when- 
ever I think about mine errors, I am like to cover my lips for 
shame." Here she looked up and smiled. — " It's a strange thing 
now — I hae spoke mair gude words to you in ten minutes, than I 
wad speak to my mother in as mony years. It's no that I dinna 
think on them — and whiles they are just at my tongue's end, but 
then comes the Devil, and brushes my lips with his black wing, 
and lays his broad black loof on my mouth — for a black loof it is, 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 249 

Jeanie — and sweeps awa a' my gude thoughts, and dits up my 
gude words, and pits a wheen fule sangs and idle vanities in then- 
place." 

" Try, Madge," said Jeanie, " try to settle your mind and make 
your breast clean, and you'll find your heart easier — Just resist the 
devil, and he will flee from you — and mind that, as my worthy 
father tells me, there is nae devil sae deceitfu' as our ain wandering 
thoughts." 

" And that's true too, lass," said Madge, starting up ; " and I'll 
gang a gate where the devil daurna follow me ; and it's a gate that 
you will like dearly to gang — but I'll keep a fast haud o' your arm, 
for fear Apollyon should stride across the path, as he did in the 
Pilgrim's Progress." 

Accordingly she got up, and, taking Jeanie by the arm, began to 
walk forward at a great pace ; and soon, to her companion's no 
small joy, came into a marked path, with the meanders of which 
she seemed perfectly acquainted. Jeanie endeavoured to bring her 
back to the confessional, but the fancy was gone by. In fact, the 
mind of this deranged being resembled nothing so much as a 
quantity of dry leaves, which may for a few minutes remain still, 
but are instantly discomposed and put in motion by the first casual 
breath of air. She had now got John Bunyan's parable into her 
head, to the exclusion of everything else, and on she went with 
great volubility. 

" Did ye never read the Pilgrim's Progress ? And you shall be 
the woman Christiana, and I will be the maiden Mercy — for ye 
ken Mercy was of the fairer countenance, and the more alluring 
than her companion — and if I had -my little messan dog here, it 
would be Great Heart their guide, ye ken, for he was e'en as bauld, 
that he wad bark at ony thing twenty times his size ; and that was 
e'en the death of him, for he bit Corporal MacAlpine's heels ae 
morning when they were hauling me to the guard-house, and Cor- 
poral MacAlpine killed the bit faithfu' thing wi' his Lochaber axe 
— diel pike the Hieland banes o' him ! " 

" O fie, Madge," said Jeanie, " ye should not speak such words." 

" It's vera true," said Madge, shaking her head ; " but then I 
maunna think o' my puir bit doggie, Snap, when I saw it lying 
dying in the gutter. But it's just as weel, for it suffered baith cauld 
and hunger when it was living, and in the grave there is rest for a' 
things — rest for the doggie, and my puir bairn, and me." 

" Your bairn ? " said Jeanie, conceiving that by speaking on such 
a topic, supposing it to be a real one, she could not fail to bring 
her companion to a more composed temper. 

She was mistaken, however, for Madge coloured, and replied 
with some anger, " My bairn ? ay, to be sure, my bairn. Whatfor 
shouldna I hae a bairn, and lose a bairn too, as weel as your bonny 
tittie, the Lily of St. Leonard's ? " 

The answer struck Jeanie with some alarm, and she was anxious 
to soothe the irritation she had unwittingly given occasion to. " I 
am very sorry for your misfortune " 

" Sorry ? what wad ye be sorry for ? " answered Madge. " The 



25° THE HEART OF MID-LOTHTAN. 

bairn was a blessing — that is, Jeanie, it wad hae been a blessing if 
it hadna been for my mother ; but my mother's a queer woman. — 
Ye see, there was an auld carle wi' a bit land, and a gude clat o' 
siller besides, just the very picture of auld Mr. Feeblemihd or Mr. 
Ready-to-haul, that Greatheart delivered from Slaygood the giant, 
when he was rifling him and about to pick his bones, for Slaygood 
was of the nature of the flesh-eaters — and Great-heart killed Giant 
Despair too— but I am doubting Giant Despair's come alive again,, 
for a' the story book — I find him busy at my heart whiles." 

" Weel, and so the auld carle," — said Jeanie, for she was pain- 
fully interested in getting to the truth of Madge's history, which 
she could not but suspect was in some extraordinary way linked 
and entwined with the fate of her sister. She was also desirous, if 
possible, to engage her companion in some narrative which might 
be carried on in a lower tone of voice, for she was in great appre- 
hension lest the elevated notes of Madge's conversation should 
direct her mother or the robbers in search of them. 

" And so the auld .carle," said Madge, repeating her words — " I 
wish ye had seen him stoiting about, aff ae leg on to the other, wi' 
a kind o' dot-and-go-one sort o' motion, as if ilk ane o' his twa legs 
had belanged to sindry folk — but Gentle George could take him 
aff brawly — Eh, as I used to laugh to see George gang hip-hop 
like him !- I dinna ken, I think I laughed heartier then than what 
I do now, though maybe no just sae muckle." 

" And who was gentle Georgie ?" said Jeanie, endeavouring to 
bring her back to, her story. 

" O, he was Geordie Robertson, ye ken, when he was in Edin- 
burgh ; but that's no his right name, neither — His name is But 

what is your business wi' his name ? " said she, as if upon sudden 
recollection. " What have ye to do asking for folk's names ? — 
Haye ye a mind I should scour my knife between your ribs, as my 
mother says ? " 

As this was spoken with a menacing tone and gesture, Jeanie 
hastened to protest her total innocence of purpose in the acci- 
dental question which she had asked, and Madge Wildfire went on, 
somewhat pacified. 

" Never ask folk's names, Jeanie — it's no civil — I hae seen half 
a dozen o' folk in my mother's at anes, and ne'er ane o' them ca'd 
the ither by his name ; and Daddie Ratton says, it is the most 
uncivil thing may be, because the bailie bodies are' aye asking 
fashious questions, when ye saw sic a man, or sic a man ; and if ye 
dinna ken their names, ye ken there can be nae mair speer'd about 
it." 

In what strange school, thought Jeanie to herself, has this poor 
creature been bred up, where such remote precautions are taken 
against the pursuits of justice ? What would my father or Reuben 
Butler think, if I were to tell them there are sic folk in the world ? 
And to abuse the simplicity of this demented creature ! ,Oh, that 
I were but safe at hame amang mine ain leal and true people ! and 
I'll bless God, while I have breath, that placed me amongst those 
who live in His fear, and under the shadow of His wing." 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 251 

She was interrupted by the insane laugh of Madge Wildfire, as 
she saw a magpie hop across the path. 

" See there ! — that was the gait my auld joe used to cross the 
country, but no just sae lightly — he hadna wings to help his auld 
legs, I trow ; but I behoved to have married him for a' that, Jeanie, 
or my mother wad hae been the dead o' me. But then came in the 
story of my poor bairn, and my mother thought he wad be deaved 
wi' its skirling, and she pat it away in below the bit bourock of turf 
yonder, just to be out o' the gate ; and I think she buried my best 
wits with it, for I have never been just mysell since. And only think, 
Jeanie, after my mother had been at a' this pains, the auld doited 
body Johny Drottle turned up his nose, and wadna hae aught to 
say to me ! But it's little I care for him, for I have led a merry 
life ever since, and ne'er a braw gentleman looks at me but ye wad 
think he was gaun to drop off his horse for mere love of me. I 
have ken'd some o' them put their hand in their pocket, and 
gie me as muckle as sixpence at a time, just 'for my weel-faurd 
face." 

This speech gave Jeanie a dark insight into Madge's history. 
She had been courted by a wealthy suitor, whose addresses her 
mother had favoured, notwithstanding the objection of old age and 
deformity. She had been .seduced by some profligate, and, to 
conceal her shame and promote the advantageous match she had 
planned, her mother had not hesitated to destroy the offspring of 
their intrigue. That the consequence should be the total derange- 
ment of a mind which was constitutionally unsettled by giddiness 
and vanity, was extremely natural ; and such was, in fact, the 
history of Madge Wildfire's insanity. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 



So free from danger, free from fear, 

They cross'd the court — right glad they were. 

Christabel. 

PURSUING the path which Madge had chosen, Jeanie Deans 
observed, to her no small delight, that marks of more cultivation 
appeared, and the thatched roofs of houses, with their blue smoke 
arising in little columns, were seen embosomed in a tuft of trees at 
some distancei The track led in that direction, and Jeanie, there- 
fore, resolved, while Madge continued to pursue it, that she would 
ask her no questions ; having had the penetration" to observe, that 
by doing so she ran the risk of irritating her guide, or awakening 
suspicions, to the impressions of which, persons in Madge's unsettled 
state of mind are particularly liable. 

Madge, therefore, uninterrupted, went on with the wild disjointed 
chat which her rambling imagination suggested ; a mood in which 
she was much more communicative respecting her own history, and 
that of others, than when there was any attempt made, by direct 



252 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

queries, or cross-examminations, to extract information on these 
subjects. 

," It's a queer thing," she said, " but whiles I can speak about the 
bit bairn and the rest of it, just as if it had been another body's, 
and no my ain ; and whiles I am like to break my heart about it — 
Had you ever a bairn, Jeanie?" 

Jeanie replied in the negative. ~ 

" Ay ; but your sister had, though — and I ken what came o't too." 

" In the name of heavenly mercy," said Jeanie, forgetting the line 
of conduct which she had hitherto adopted, " tell me but what be- 
came of that unfortunate babe, and " 

Madge stopped, looked at her gravely and fixedly, and then broke 
into a great fit of laughing — " Aha, lass, — catch me if you can — I 
think it's easy to gar you trow ony thing. How suld I ken ony 
thing o' your sister's wean ? Lasses suld hae naething to do wi' 
weans till they are married — and then a' the gossips and cummers 
come in and feast as if it were the blithest day in the warld. — They 
say maidens' bairns are weel guided. I wot that wasna true of " 
your tittie's and mine ; but these are sad tales to tell — I maun just 
sing a bit to keep up my heart — It's a sang that Gentle George 
made on me lang syne, when I went .with him to Lockington wake, 
to see him act upon a stage, in fine clothes, with the player folk. 
He micht hae dune waur than married me that nicht as he promised 
— better wed over the mixen* as over the moor, as they say in 
Yorkshire — he may gang farther and fare waur— but that's a' ane 
to the sang, 

" I'm Madge of the country, I'm Madge of the town, 
And I'm Madge of the lad I 'am blithest to own — 
The Lady of Beever in diamonds may shine, 
But has not a heart half so lightsome as mine. 

" I am Queen of the Wake, and I'm Lady of May, 
And I lead the blithe ring round the May-pole to-day ; 
The wild-fire that flashes so fair and so free, 
Was never so bright, or so bonny, as me. 

" I like that the best o' a' my sangs," continued the maniac, 
" because he made it. I am often singing it, and that's maybe 
the reason folk ca' me Madge Wildfire. I aye answer to the name, 
though it's no my ain, for what's the use of making a fash ?" 

" But ye shouldna sing upon the Sabbath at least," said Jeanie, 
who, amid all her distress and anxiety, could not help being scan- 
dalized at the deportment of her companion, especially as they now 
approached near to the little village. 

"Ay ! is this Sunday ?" said Madge. " My mother leads sic a 
life, wi' turning nicht into day, that ane loses a' count o' the days o' 
the week, and disna ken Sunday frae Saturday. Besides, it's a' 
your whiggery— in England, folk sings when they like — And then, 
ye ken, you are Christiana and I am Mercy — and ye ken, as they 
went on their way, they sang." — And she immediately raised one of 
John Bunyan's ditties : — 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 253 

" He that is down need fear no fall, 
He that is low no pride, 
He that is humble ever shall 
Have God to be his guide. 

" Fulness to such a burthen is 
That go on pilgrimage ; 
Here little, and hereafter bliss, 
Is best from age to age. 

" And do ye ken, Jeanie, I think there's much truth in that book, 
the Pilgrim's Progress. The boy that sings that song was feeding 
his father's sheep in the Valley of Humiliation, and Mr. Greatheart 
says, that he lived a merrier life, and had more of the herb called 
heart's-ease in his bosom, than they that wear silk and velvet like 
me, and are as bonny as I am." 

Jeanie Deans had never read the fanciful and delightful parable 
to which Madge alluded. Bunyan was, indeed, a rigid Calvinist, 
,but then he was also a member of a Baptist congregation, so that 
his works had no place on David Deans's shelf of divinity. Madge, 
however, at some time of her life, had been well acquainted, as it 
appeared, with the most popular of his performances, which, 
indeed, rarely fails to make a deep impression upon children, and 
people of the lower rank. 

" I am sure," she continued, " I may weel say I am come out of 
the city of Destruction, for my mother is Mrs. Bate-eyes, that 
dwells at Deadman's corner ; and Frank Levitt, and Tyburn Tarn, 
they may be likened to Mistrust and Guilt, that came galloping up, 
and struck the poor pilgrim to the ground with a great club, and 
stole a bag of silver, which was most of his spending money, and so 
have they done to many, and will do to more. But now we will 
gang to the Interpreter's house, *for I ken a man that will play the 
Interpreter richt weel ; for he has eyes lifted up to heaven, the best 
of books in his hand, the law of truth written on his lips, and he 
stands as if he pleaded wi' men — Oh, if I had minded what he had 
said to me, I had never been the cast-away creature that I am ! — 
But it is all over now. But we'll knock at the gate, and then the 
keeper will admit Christiana, but Mercy will be left out — and then 
I'll stand at the door trembling and crying, and then Christiana — 
that's you, Jeanie — will intercede for me ; and then Mercy — that's 
me, ye ken — will faint ; and then the Interpreter — yes, the Inter- 
preter, that's Mr. Staunton himself, will come out and takme — that's 
poor, lost, demented me — by the hand, and give me a pomegranate, 
and a piece of honeycomb, and a small bottle of spirits, to stay 
my fainting — and then the good times will come back again, and 
we'll be the happiest folk you ever saw." 

In the midst of the confused assemblage of ideas indicated in 
this speech, Jeanie thought she saw a serious purpose on the part 
of Madge, to endeavour to obtain the pardon and countenance of 
some one whom she had offended ; an attempt the most likely of all 
others to bring them once more into contact with law and legal pro- 
tection. She, therefore, resolved to be guided by her while she was in 



254 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

so hopeful a disposition, and act for her own safety according to 
circumstances. 

They were now close by the village, one of those beautiful scenes 
which are so often found in merry England, where the cottages, 
instead of being built in two direct lines on each side of a dusty 
high road, stand in detached groups, interspersed not only with 
large oaks and elms, but with fruit-trees, so many of which were at 
this time in flourish, that the grove seemed enamelled with their 
crimson and white blossoms. In the centre of the hamlet stood 
the parish church, and its little Gothic tower, from which at present 
was heard the Sunday chime of bells. 

" We will wait here until the folk are a' in the church — they ca' 
the kirk a church in England, Jeanie, b& sure you mind that — for if 
I was gaun forward amang them, a' the gaitts o' boys and lasses 
wad be crying at Madge Wildfire's tail, the little hell-rakers ! and 
the beadle would be as hard upon us as if it was our fault. I like their 
skirling as ill as he does, I can tell him ; I 'm sure I often wish there 
was a het peat doun their throats when they set them up that gate." 

Conscious of the disorderly appearance of her own dress after 
the adventure of the preceding night, and of the grotesque habit 
and demeanour of her guide, and sensible how important it was to 
secure an attentive and patient audience to her strange story from 
some one who might have the means to protect her, Jeanie readily 
acquiesced in Madge's proposal to rest under the trees, by which 
they were still somewhat screened, until the commencement of 
service should give them an opportunity of entering the hamlet 
without attracting a crowd around them. She made theless oppo- 
sition, that Madge had intimated that this was not the village 
where her mother was in custody, and that the two squires of the 
pad were absent in a different direction. 

She sate herself down, therefore, at the foot of an oak, and by 
the assistance of a placid fountain, which had been dammed up 
for the use of the villagers, and which served her as a natural 
mirror, she began — no uncommon thing with a Scottish maiden of 
her rank — to arrange her toilet in the open air, and bring her dress, 
soiled and disordered as it was, into such order as the place and 
circumstances admitted. 

She soon perceived reason, however, to regret that she had set 
about this task, however decent and necessary, in the present time 
and society. Madge Wildfire, who, among other indications of 
insanity, had a most overweening opinion of those charms, to 
which, in fact, she had owed her misery, and whose mind, like a 
raft upon a lake, was agitated and driven about at random by each 
fresh impulse, no sooner beheld Jeanie begin to arrange her hair, 
place her bonnet in order, rub the dust from her shoes and clothes, 
adjust her neck-handkerchief and mittens, and so forth, than with 
imitative zeal she began to bedizen and trick herself out with 
shreds and remnants of beggarly finery, which she took out of a 
little bundle, and which, when disposed around her person, made 
her appearance ten times more fantastic and apish than it had been 
before. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 2JS 

Jeanie groaned in spirit, but dared not interfere in a matter so 
delicate. Across the man's cap or riding hat which she wore, 
Madge placed a broken and soiled white feather, intersected with 
one which had been shed from the train of a peacock. To her 
dress, which was a kind of riding-habit, she stitched, pinned, and 
otherwise secured, a large furbelow of artificial flowers, all crushed, 
wrinkled, and dirty, which had first bedecked a lady of quality, 
then descended to her Abigail, and dazzled the inmates of the 
servants'-hall. A tawdry scarf of yellow silk, trimmed with tinsel 
and spangles, which had seen as hard service, and boasted as 
honourable a transmission, was next flung over one shoulder, and 
fell across her person in the manner of a shoulder-belt, or baldrick. 
Madge then stripped off the coarse ordinary shoes which she wore, ' 
and replaced them by a pair of dirty satin ones, spangled and em- 
broidered to match the scarf, and furnished with very high heels. 
She had cut a willow switch in her morning's walk, almost as long 
as a boy's fishing-rod. This she set herself seriously to peel, and 
when it was transformed into such a wand as the Treasurer or High 
Steward bears on public occasions, she told Jeanie that she thought 
they now looked decent, as young women shquld do upon the 
Sunday morning, and that as the bells had done ringing, she was 
willing to conduct her to the Interpreter's house. 

Jeanie sighed heavily, to think it should be her lot on the Lord's 
day, and during kirk-time too, to parade the street of an inhabited 
village with so very grotesque a comrade ; but necessity had no 
law, since, without a positive quarrel with the madwoman, which, 
in the circumstances, would have been very unadvisable, she could 
see no means of shaking herself free of her society. 

As for poor Madge, she was completely elated with personal 
vanity, and the most perfect satisfaction concerning her own 
dazzling dress, and superior appearance. They entered the hamlet 
without being observed, except by one old woman, who, being 
nearly " high-gravel blind," was only conscious that something very 
fine and glittering was passing by, and dropped as deep a reverence 
to Madge as she would have done to a countess. This filled up 
the measure of Madge's self-approbation. She minced, she ambled, 
she smiled, she simpered, and waved Jeanie Deans forward with 
the condescension of a noble chaj>erone, who has undertaken the 
charge of a country miss on her first journey to the capital. 

Jeanie followed in patience, and with her eyes fixed on the 
ground^ that she might save herself the mortification of seeing her 
companion's absurdities ; but she started when, ascending two or 
,three steps, she found herself in the churchyard, and saw fhat 
Madge was making straight for the door of the church. As Jeanie 
had no mind to enter the congregation in such company, she walked 
aside from the pathway, and said in a decided tone, " Madge, I will 
wait here till the church comes out — you may go in by yourself if 
you have a mind." 

As she spoke these words, she was about to seat herself upon 
one of the gravestones. 

Madge was a little before Jeanie when she turned aside ; but 



256 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

suddenly changing her course, she followed her with long strides, 
and, with every feature inflamed with passion, overtook and seized 
her by the arm. " Do ye think, ye ungratefu' wretch, that I am 
gaun to let you sit doun upon my father's grave ? The deil settle 
ye doun ; — if ye dinna rise and come into the Interpreter's house, 
that's the house of God, wi' me, but I'll rive every dud aff your back ! " 
She adapted the action to the phrase ; for with one clutch she 
stripped Jeanie of her straw bonnet and a handful of her hair to 
boot, and threw it up into an old yew tree, where it stuck fast. 
Jeanie's first impulse was to scream, but conceiving she might re- 
ceive deadly harm before she could obtain the assistance of any one, 
notwithstanding the vicinity of the church, she thought it wiser to 
follow the madwoman into the congregation, where she might find 
some means of escape from her, or at least be secured against her 
violence. But when she meekly intimated her consent to follow 
Madge, her guide's uncertain brain had caught another train of 
ideas. She held Jeanie fast with one hand, and with the other 
pointed to the inscription on the gravestone, and commanded her 
to read it. Jeanie obeyed, and read these words : — ■ 

" This Monument was erected to the Memory of 
Donald Murdockson of the King's xxvi., or Came- 
ronian Regiment, a sincere Christian, a brave 
Soldier, and a faithful Servant, by his grateful 
and sorrowing master, robert staunton 1 ." 

" It's very wecl read, Jeanie ; it's just the very words," said 
Madge, whose ire had now faded into deep melancholy, and with a 
step which, to Jeanie's great joy, was uncommonly quiet and mourn- 
ful, she led her companion towards the door of the church. 

It was one of those old-fashioned Gothic parish churches which 
are frequent in England, the most cleanly, decent, and reverential 
places of worship that are, perhaps, anywhere to be found in the 
Christian world. Yet, notwithstanding the decent solemnity of its 
exterior, Jeanie was too faithful to the directory of the presbyterian 
!kirk to have entered a prelatic place of worship, and would, upon 
any other occasion, have thought that she beheld in the porch the 
venerable figure of her father waving her back from the entrance, 
and pronouncing in a solemn tone, " Cease, my child, to hear the 
instruction which causeth to err from the words of knowledge." 
But in her present agitating and alarming situation, she looked for 
safety to this forbidden place of assembly, as the hunted animal 
will sometimes seek shelter from imminent danger in the human 
habitation, or in other places of refuge most alien to its nature and 
habits. Not even the sound of the organ, and of one or two flutes 
which accompanied the psalmody, prevented her from following her 
guide into the chancel of the church. 

No sooner had Madge put her foot upon the pavement, and be- 
come sensible that she was the object of attention to the spectators, 
than she resumed all the fantastic extravagance of deportment 
which some transient touch of melancholy had banished for an in- 
stant. She swam rather than walked up the centre aisle, dragging 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 237 

Jeanie after her, whom she held fast by the hand. She would, 
indeed, have fain slipped aside into the pew nearest to the door, 
and left Madge to ascend in her own manner and alone to the high 
places of the synagogue ; but this was impossible, without a degree 
of violent resistance, which seemed to her inconsistent with the 
time and place, and she was accordingly led in captivity up the 
whole length of the church by her grotesque conductress, who, with 
half-shut eyes, a prim smile upon her lips, and a mincing motion 
with her hands, which corresponded with the delicate and affected 
pace at which she was pleased to move, seemed to take the general 
stare of the congregation, which such an exhibition necessarily ex- 
cited, as a high compliment, and which she returned by nods and 
half curtsies to individuals amongst the audience, whom she seemed 
to distinguish as acquaintances. Her absurdity was enhanced in 
the eyes of the spectators by the strange contrast which she formed 
to her companion, who, with dishevelled hair, downcast eyes, and 
a face glowing with shame, was dragged, as it were, in triumph 
after her. 

Madge's airs were at length fortunately cut short by her en- 
countering in her progress the looks of the clergyman, who fixed 
upon her a glance, at once steady, compassionate, and admonitory. 
She hastily opened an empty pew which happened to be near her, 
and entered, dragging in Jeanie after her. Kicking Jeanie on the 
shins, by way of hint that she should follow her example, she sunk 
her head upon her hand for the space of a minute. Jeanie, to 
whom this posture of mental devotion was entirely new, did not 
attempt to do the like, but looked round her with a bewildered 
stare, which her neighbours, judging from the company in which 
they saw her, very naturally ascribed to insanity. Every person in 
their immediate vicinity drew back from this extraordinary couple 
as far as the limits of their pew permitted ; but one old man could 
not get beyond Madge's reach, ere she had snatched the prayer- 
book from his hand, and ascertained the lesson -of the day. She 
then turned up the ritual, and, with the most overstrained enthu- 
siasm of gesture and manner, showed Jeanie the passages as 
they were read in the service, making, at the same time, her 
own responses so loud as to be heard above those of every other 
person. 

Notwithstanding the shame and vexation which Jeanie felt in 
being thus exposed in a place of worship, she could not and durst 
not omit rallying her spirits so as to look around her, and consider 
to whom she ought to appeal for. protection so soon as the service 
should be concluded. Her first ideas naturally fixed upon the 
clergyman, and she was confirmed in the resolution by observing 
that he was an aged gentleman, of a dignified appearance and de- 
portment, who read the service with an undisturbed and decent 
gravity, which brought back to becoming attention those younger 
members of the congregation who had been disturbed by the 
extravagant behaviour of Madge Wildfire. To the clergyman, 
therefore, Jeanie resolved to make her appeal when the service 
was over. 



258 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

It is true she felt disposed to be shocked at his surplice, of which 
she had heard so much, but which she had never seen upon the 
person of a preacher of the word. Then she was confused by the 
change of posture adopted in different parts of the ritual, the more 
so as Madge Wildfire, to whom they seemed familiar, took the op- 
portunity to exercise authority over her, pulling her up and pushing 
her down with a bustling assiduity, which Jeanie felt must make 
them both the objects of painful attention. But, notwithstanding 
these prejudices, it was her prudent resolution, in this dilemma, to 
imitate as nearly as she could what was done around her. The 
prophet, she thought, permitted Naaman the Syrian to bow even in 
\he house of Rimmon. Surely if I, in this strait, worship the 
God of my fathers in mine own language, although the manner 
thereof be strange to me, the Lord- will pardon me in this thing. 

In this resolution she became so much confirmed, that, with- 
drawing herself from Madge as far as the pew permitted, she en- 
deavoured to evince, by serious and composed attention to what 
was passing, that her mind was composed to devotion. Her tor- 
mentor would not long have permitted her to remain quiet, but 
fatigue overpowered her, and she fell fast asleep in the other corner 
of the pew. 

Jeanie, though her mind in her own despite sometimes reverted 
to her situation, compelled herself to give attention to a sensible, 
energetic, and well-composed discourse, upon the practical doctrines 
of Christianity, which she could not help approving, although it was 
every word written down and read by the preacher, and although 
it was delivered in a tone and gesture very different from those of 
Boanerges Stormheaven, who was her father's favourite preacher. 
The serious and placid attention with which Jeanie listened did not 
escape the clergyman. Madge Wildfire's entrance had rendered 
him apprehensive of some disturbance, to provide against which, as 
far as possible, he often turned his eyes to the part of the church 
where Jeanie and she were placed, and became soon aware that, 
although the loss of her head-gear, and the awkwardness of her 
situation, had given an uncommon and anxious air to the features 
of the former, yet she was in a state of mind very different from 
that of her companion. When he dismissed the congregation, he 
observed her look around with a wild and terrified look, as if un- 
certain what course she ought to adopt, and noticed that she 
approached one or two of the most decent of the congregation, as 
if to address them, and then shrunk back timidly, on observing 
that they seemed to shun and to avoid her. The clergyman was 
satisfied there must be something extraordinary in all this, and as 
a benevolent man, as well as a good Christian pastor, he resolved 
to inquire into the matter more minutely. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 359 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

There govern'd in that year 

A stern, stout churl — an angry overseer. 

Crabbe. 

While Mr. Staunton, for such was this worthy clergyman's 
name, was laying aside his gown in the vestry, Jeanie was in the 
act of coming to an open rupture with Madge. 

" We must return to Mummer's barn directly,'' said Madge ; 
" we'll be ower late, and my mother will be angry." 

" I am not going back with you, Madge," said Jeanie, taking out 
a guinea, and offering it to her ; " I am much obliged to you, but I 
maun gang my ain road." 

" And me coming a' this way out o' my gate to pleasure you, ye 
ungratefu' cutty," answered Madge ; " and me to be brained by my 
mother when I gang hame. and a' for your sake ! — But I will gar 
ye as good " 

" For God's sake," said Jeanie to a man who stood beside them, 
u keep her off ! — she is mad." 

" Ey, ey," answered the boor ; " I hae some guess of that, and I 
trow thou be'st a bird of the same feather. — Howsomever, Madge, 
I redd thee keep hand off her, or I'se lend thee a whister-poop." 

Several of the lower class of the parishioners now gathered round 
the strangers, and the cry arose among the boys, that " there was 
a-going to be a fite between mad Madge Murdockson and another 
Bess of Bedlam." But while the fry assembled with the humane 
hope of seeing as much of the fun as possible, the laced cocked hat 
.of the beadle was discerned among the multitude, and all made 
way for that person of awful authority. His first address was to 
Madge. 

" What's brought thee back again, thou silly donnot, to plague 
this parish ? Hast thou brought ony more bastards wi' thee to lay 
to honest men's doors ? or does thou think to burden us with this 
.goose, that's as gare-brained as thysell, as if rates were no up 
enow? Away wi' thee to thy thief of a mother ; she's fast in the 
■stocks at Barkston townend — Away wi' ye out o' the parish, or I'se 
be at ye with the ratan." 

Madge stood sulky for a minute ; but she had been too often 
taught submission to the beadle's authority by ungentle means, to 
feel courage enough to dispute it. 

"And my mother — my puir auld mother, is in the stocks at 
Barkston ! — This is a' your wyte, Miss Jeanie Deans ; but I'll be 
upsides wi' you, as sure as my name's Madge Wildfire — I mean 
Murdockson— God help me, I forget my very name in this con- 
fused waste." 

So saying, she turned upon her heel, and went off, followed by 
all the mischievous imps of the village, some crying, " Madge, 
canst thou tell thy name yet?" some pulling the skirts of her dress, 

r 2 



z£o THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

and all, to the best of their strength and ingenuity, exercising some 
new device or other to exasperate her into frenzy. 

Jeanie saw her departure with infinite delight, though she wished, 
that, in some way or other, she could have requited the service 
Madge had conferred upon her. 

In the meantime, she applied to the beadle to know whether 
" there was any house in the village, where she could be civilly 
entertained for her money, and whether she could be permitted to 
speak to the clergyman ? " 

" Ay, ay, we'se ha' reverend care on thee ; and I think," answered 
the man of constituted authority, " that, unless thou answer the 
Rector all the better, we'se spare thy money, and gie thee lodging at 
the parish charge, young woman." 

" Where am I to go then ? " said Jeanie, in some alarm. 

" Why, I am to take thee to his Reverence, in the first place, to- 
gie an account o' thysell, and to see thou comena to be a burden 
upon the parish." 

"I do not wish to burden anyone," replied Jeanie; "I have 
enough for my own wants, and only wish to get on my journey 
safely." 

" Why that's another matter," replied the beadle, " an if it be 
true— and I think thou dost not look so polrumptious as thy play- 
fellow yonder — Thou wouldst be a mettle lass enow, an thou wert 
snog and snod a bit better. Come thou away, then — the Rector is 
a good man." 

" Is that the minister," said Jeanie, " who preached " 

" The minister ? Lord help thee ! What kind o' presbyteriait 
art thou ? — Why, 'tis the Rector — the Rector's sell, woman, and 
there isna the like o' him in the county, nor the four next to it. 
Come away — away with thee — we maunna bide here." 

" I am sure I am very willing to go to see the minister," said 
Jeanie ; " for, though he read his discourse, and wore that surplice, 
as they call it here, I canna but think he must be a very worthy 
God-fearing man, to preach the root of the matter in the way 
he did." 

The disappointed rabble, finding that there was like to be no 
farther sport, had by this time dispersed, and Jeanie, with her usual 
patience, followed her consequential and surly, but not brutal, con- 
ductor towards the rectory. 

This clerical mansion was large and commodious, for the living 
was an excellent one, and the advowson belonged to a very wealthy 
family in the neighbourhood, who had usually bred up a son or 
nephew to the church, for the sake of inducting him, as opportunity 
offered, into this very comfortable provision. In this manner the 
rectory of Willingham had always been considered as a direct 
and immediate appanage of Willingham-hall ; and as the rich 
baronets to whom the latter belonged had usually a son or brother, 
or nephew, settled in the living, the utmost care had been taken to 
render their habitation not merely respectable and commodious, 
but even dignified and imposing. 

It was situated about four hundred yards from the village, and 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 261 

on a rising ground which sloped gently upward, covered with small 
enclosures, or closes, laid out irregularly, so that the old oaks and 
elms, which were planted in hedge-rows, fell . into perspective, and 
were blended together in beautiful irregularity. When they ap- 
proached nearer to the house, a handsome gateway admitted them 
into a lawn, of narrow dimensions, indeed, but which was inter- 
spersed with large sweet-chesinut trees and beeches, and kept in 
handsome order. The front of the house was irregular. Part of it 
seemed very old, and had, in fact, been the residence of the incum- 
bent in Romish times. Successive occupants had made consider- 
able additions and improvements, each in the taste of his own age, 
and without much regard to symmetry. But these incongruities of 
architecture were so graduated and happily mingled, that the eye, 
far from being displeased with the combinations of various styles, 
saw nothing but what was interesting in the varied and intricate 
pile which they displayed. Fruit-trees displayed on the southern 
wall, outer staircases, various places of entrance, a combination of 
roofs and chimneys of different ages, united to render the front, not, 
indeed, beautiful or grand, but intricate, perplexed, or, to use Mr. 
Price's appropriate phrase, picturesque. The most considerable 
addition was that of the present Rector, who, " being a bookish 
man," as the beadle was at the pains to inform Jeanie, to augment, 
perhaps, her reverence for the person before whom she was to 
appear, had built a handsome library and parlour, and no less than 
two additional bedrooms. 

" Mony men would hae scrupled such expense," continued the 
parochial officer, " seeing as the living mun go as it pleases Sir 
Edmund to will it ; but his Reverence has a canny bit land of his 
own, and need not look on two sides of a penny." 

Jeanie could not help comparing the irregular yet extensive and 
commodious pile of building before her, to the " Manses," in her 
own country, where a set of penurious heritors, professing all the 
while the devotion of their lives and fortunes to the presbyterian 
establishment, strain th'eir inventions to discover what may be 
nipped, and clipped, and pared from a building which forms but a 
poor accommodation even for the present incumbent, and, despite 
the superior advantage of stone-masonry, must, in the course of 
forty or fifty years, again burden their descendants with an expense, 
which, once liberally and handsomely employed, ought to have 
freed their estates from a recurrence of it for more than a century 
at least. 

Behind the Rector's house the ground sloped down to a small 
river, which, without possessing the romantic vivacity and rapidity 
of a northern stream, was, nevertheless, by its occasional appear- 
ance through the ranges of willows and poplars that crowned its 
banks, a very pleasing accompaniment to the landscape. " It was 
the best trouting stream," said the beadle, whom the patience of 
Jeanie, and especially the assurance that she was not about to 
become a burden to the parish, had rendered rather communica- 
tive, " the best trouting stream in all Lincolnshire ; for when you 
got lower, there was nought to be done wi' fly-fishing." 



Sfi2 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

Turning aside from the principal -entrance, he conducted Jeanie 
towards a sort of portal connected with the older part of the build- 
ing, which was chiefly occupied by servants, and knocking at the 
door, it was opened by a servant in grave purple lively, such as 
befitted a wealthy and dignified clergyman. 

" How dost do, Tummas ? " said the beadle—" and how's young 
Measter Staunton ? " 

" Why, but poorly — but poorly, Measter Stubbs — Are you want- 
ing to see his reverence ?" 

"Ay, ay, Tummas; please to say I ha' brought up the young 
woman as came to service to-day with mad Madge Murdockson — 
she seems to be a decentish koind o' body ; but I ha' asked her 
never a question. Only I can tell his Reverence that she is ai 
Scotchwoman, I judge, and as flat as the fens of Holland." 

Tummas honoured Jeanie Deans with such a stare, as the pam- 
pered domestics of the rich, whether spiritual or temporal, usually 
esteem it part of their privilege to bestow upon the poor, and then- 
desired Mr. Stubbs and his charge to step in till he informed his 
master of their presence. 

The room into which he showed them was a sort of steward : s 
parlour, hung with a county map or two, and three or four prints of 
eminent persons connected with the county, as Sir William Mon- 
son, James York the blacksmith of Lincoln, and the famous Pere- 
grine, Lord Willoughby, in complete armour, looking as when he 
said, in the words of the legend below the engraving, — 

" Stand to it, noble pikemen, 
And face ye well about ; 
And shoot, ye sharp, bold bowmen, 
And we will keep them out. 

Ye musquet and calliver-men, 

Do you prove true to me, 
I'll be the foremost man- in fight, 

Said brave Lord Willoughbee." 

When they had entered this apartment, Tummas as a matter of 
course offered, and as a matter of course Mr. Stubbs accepted, a 
" summat" to eat and drink, being the respectable relics of a gam- 
mon of bacon, and a whole whiskin, or black pot of sufficient 
double ale. To these eatables Mr. Beadle seriously inclined him- 
self, and (for we must do him justice) not without an invitation to- 
Jeanie, in which Tummas joined, that his prisoner or charge would 
follow his good example. But although she might have stood in 
need of refreshment, considering she had tasted no food that day, 
the anxiety of the moment, her own sparing and abstemious habits, 
and a bashful aversion to eat in company of the two strangers, 
induced her to decline their courtesy. So she sate in a chair apart, 
while Mr. Stubbs and Mr. Tummas, who had chosen to join his 
friend in consideration that dinner was to be put back till after the 
afternoon service, made a hearty luncheon, which lasted for half 
an hour, and might not then have concluded, had not his Reverence 



'IIS 



^^^^^1^ 



'/- 




I 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 263 

rung his bell, so that Tummas was obliged to attend his master. 
Then, and no sooner, to save himself the labour of a second 
journey to the other end of the house, he announced to his master 
the arrival of Mr. Stubbs, with the other madwoman, as he chose 
to designate Jeanie, as an event which had just taken place. He 
returned with an order that Mr. Stubbs and the young woman 
should be instantly ushered up to the library. < 

The beadle bolted in haste his last mouthful of fat bacon, washed 
down the greasy morsel with the last rinsings of the pot of ale, and 
immediately marshalled Jeanie through one or two intricate pas- 
sages which led from the ancient to the more modern buildings, 
into a handsome little hall, or anteroom, adjoining to the library, 
and out of which a glass door opened to the lawn. 

" Stay here," said Stubbs, '' till I tell his Reverence you are 
come." 

So saying, he opened a door and entered the library. 

Without wishing to hear their conversation, Jeanie, as she was 
circumstanced, could not avoid it; for as Stubbs stood by the 
door, and his Reverence was at the upper end of a large room, their 
conversation was necessarily audible in the anteroom. 

"So you have brought the young woman here at last, Mr. 
Stubbs. I expected you some time since. You know I do not 
wish such persons to remain in custody a moment without some 
inquiry into their situation." 

" Very true, your Reverence," replied the beadle ; " but the young 
woman had eat nought to-day, and so Measter Tummus did set 
down a drap of drink and a morsel, to be sure." 

" Thomas was very right, Mr. Stubbs ; and what has become of 
the other most unfortunate being ? " 

" Why," replied Mr. Stubbs, " I did think the sight on her would 
but vex your Reverence, and soa I did let her go her ways back to 
her mother, who is in trouble in the next parish." 

" In trouble ! — that signifies in prison, I suppose ?" said Mr, 
Staunton. 

" Ay, truly ; something like it, an it like your Reverence." 

" Wretched, unhappy, incorrigible woman ! " said the clergyman. 
" And what sort of person is this companion of hers ?" 

" Why, decent enow, an it like your Reverence," said Stubbs ; 
" for aught I sees of her, there's no harm of her, and she says she 
has cash enow to carry her out of the county." 

" Cash ! that is always what you think of, Stubbs. — But, has she 
sense ? — has she her wits ? — has she the capacity of taking care of 
herself?" 

" Why, your Reverence," replied Stubbs, " I cannot just say — I 
will be sworn she was not born at Witt-ham ;* for Gaffer Gibbs 
looked at her all the time of service, and he says she could not 
turn up a single lesson like a Christian, even though she had 
Madge Murdockson to help her — but then, as to fending for her- 
sell, why, she's a bit of a Scotchwoman, your Reverence, and they 
say the worst donnot of them can look out for their own turn — and 
she is decently put on enow, and not bechounced like t'other." 



264 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" Send her in here, then, and do you remain below, Mr. Stubbs." 

This colloquy had engaged Jeanie's attention so deeply, that it 
was not until it was over that she observed that the sashed door, 
which, we have said, led from the anteroom into the garden, was 
opened, and that there entered, or rather was borne in by two 
assistants, a young man, of a very pale and sickly appearance, 
whom they lifted to the nearest couch, and placed there, as if to 
recover from the fatigue of an unusual exertion. Just as they were 
making this arrangement, Stubbs came out of the library, and 
summoned Jeanie to enter it. She obeyed him, not without tremor ; 
for, beside the novelty of the situation to a girl of her secluded 
habits, she felt also as if the successful prosecution of her journey 
was to depend upon the impression she should be able to make on 
Mr. Staunton. 

It is true, it was difficult to suppose on what pretext a person 
travelling on her own business, and at her own charge, could be 
interrupted upon her route. But the violent detention she had 
already undergone, was sufficient to show that there existed persons 
at no great distance who had the interest, the inclination, and the 
audacity, forcibly to stop her journey, and she felt the necessity of 
having some countenance and protection, at least till she should 
get beyond their reach. While these things passed through her 
mind, much faster than our pen and ink can record, or even the 
reader's eye collect the meaning of its traces, Jeanie found herself 
in a handsome library, and in presence of the Rector of Willing- 
ham. The well-furnished presses and shelves which surrounded 
the large and handsome apartment, contained more books than 
Jeanie imagined existed in the world, being accustomed to consider 
as an extensive collection two fir shelves, each about three fee': 
long, which contained her father's treasured volumes, the whole 
pith and marrow, as he used sometimes to boast, of modern divinity. 
An orrery, globes, a telescope, and some other scientific implements 
conveyed to Jeanie an impression of admiration and wonder not 
unmixed with fear ; "for, in her ignorant apprehension, they seemed 
rather adapted for magical purposes than any other ; and a few 
stuffed animals (as the Rector was fond of natural history) added 
to the impressive character of the apartment. 

Mr. Staunton spoke to her with great mildness. He observed, 
that, although her appearance at church had been uncommon, and 
in strange, and, he must add, discreditable society, and calculated, 
upon the whole, to disturb the congregation during divine worship, 
he wished, nevertheless, to hear her own account of herself before 
taking any steps which his duty might seem to demand. He was 
a justice of peace, he informed her, as well as a clergyman. 

" His honour " (for she would not say his reverence) " was very 
civil and kind," was all that poor Jeanie could at first bring out. 

" Who are you, young woman ?" said the clergyman, more per- 
emptorily — " and what do you do in this country, and in such com- 
pany ? — We allow no strollers or vagrants here." 

" I am not a vagrant or a stroller, sir," said Jeanie, a little roused 
by the supposition. " I am a decent Scots lass, travelling through 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 265 

the land on my own business and my own expenses ; and I was so 
unhappy as to fall in with bad compaay, and was stopped a' night 
on my journey. And this puir creature, who is something light- 
headed, let me out in the morning." 

" Bad company ! " said the clergyman. " I am afraid, young 
woman, you have not been sufficiently anxious to avoid them." 

" Indeed, sir," returned Jeanie, " I have been brought up to shun 
evil communication. But these wicked people were thieves, and 
stopped me by violence and mastery." 

-" Thieves ! " said Mr. Staunton ; " then you charge them with 
robbery, I suppose ? " 

" No, sir ; they did not take so much as a boddle from me," 
answered Jeanie ; " nor did they use me ill, otherwise than by con- 
fining me." 

The clergyman inquired into the particulars of her adventure, 
which she told him from point to point. 

" This is an extraordinary, and not a very probable tale, young 
■woman," resumed Mr. Staunton. " Here has been, according to 
your account, a great violence committed without any adequate 
motive. Are you aware of the law of this country — that if you 
lodge this charge, you will be bound over to prosecute this gang ? " 

Jeanie did not understand him, and he explained, that the 
English law, in addition to the inconvenience sustained by persons 
who have been robbed or injured, has the goodness to intrust to 
them the care and the expense of appearing as prosecutors. 

Jeanie said, " that her business at London was express ; all she 
wanted was, that any gentleman would, out of Christian charity, 
protect her to some town where she could hire horses and a guide ; 
and, finally," she thought, " it would be her father's mind that she 
was not free to give testimony in an English court of justice, as the 
land was not under a direct gospel dispensation." 

Mr. Staunton stared a little, and asked if her father was a 
Quaker. 

"God forbid, sir," said Jeanie— " He is nae schismatic nor sectary, 
nor ever treated for sic black commodities as theirs, and that's weel 
ken'd o' him." 

"And what is his name, pray?" said Mr. Staunton. 

"David Deans, sir, the cowfeeder at Saint Leonard's Crags, near 
Edinburgh." 

A deep groan from the anteroom prevented the Rector from re- 
plying, and, exclaiming, " Good God ! that unhappy boy ! " he left 
Jeanie alone, and hastened into the outer apartment. 

Some noise and bustle was heard, but no one entered the library 
for the best part of an hour. 



266 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 

Fantastic passions' maddening brawl ! 
And shame and terror over all ! 
Deeds to be hid which were not hid, 
Which, all confused, I could not know 
Whether I suffertl or I did, 
For all seem'd guilt, remorse, or woe, 
My own, or others, still the same 
Life-stifling fear, soul-stifling shame. 

Coleridge. 

During the interval while she was thus left alone, Jeanie 
anxiously revolved in her mind what course was best for her to- 
pursue. She was impatient to continue her journey, yet she feared 
she could not safely adventure to do so while the old hag and her 
assistants were in the neighbourhood, without risking a repetition 
of their violence. She thought she could collect from the conver- 
sation which she had partly overheard, and also from the wild con- 
fessions of Madge Wildfire, that her mother had a deep and re- 
vengeful motive for obstructing her journey if possible. And from 
whom could she hope for assistance if not from Mr. Staunton ? 
His whole appearance and demeanour seemed to encourage her 
hopes. His features were handsome, though marked with a deep 
cast of melancholy ; his tone and language were gentle and en- 
couraging ; and, as he had served in the army for several years 
during his youth, his air retained that easy frankness which is 
peculiar to the profession of arms. He was, besides, a minister of 
the gospel ; and although a worshipper, according to Jeanie's 
notions, in the court of the Gentiles, and so benighted as to wear 
a surplice ; although he read the Common Prayer, and wrote down 
every word of his sermon before delivering it ; and although he 
was, moreover, in strength of lungs, as well as pith and marrow of 
doctrine, vastly inferior to Boanerges Stormheaven, Jeanie still 
thought he must be a very different person from Curate Kiltstoup, 
and other prelatical divines of her father's earlier days, who used 
to get drunk in their canonical dress, and hound out the dragoons- 
against the wandering Cameronians. The house seemed to be in 
some disturbance, but as she could not suppose she was altogether 
forgotten, she thought it better to remain quiet in the apartment 
where she had been left, till some one should take notice of her. 

The first who entered was, to her no small delight, one of her 
own sex, a motherly-looking aged person of a housekeeper. To her 
Jeanie explained her situation in a few words, and begged her 
assistance. 

The dignity of a housekeeper did not encourage too much fami- 
liarity with a person who was at the Rectory on justice-business, 
and whose character might seem in her eyes somewhat precarious ; 
but she was civil, although distant. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 267 

" Her young master," she said, " had had a bad accident by a 
fall from his horse, which made him liable to fainting fits ; he had 
been taken very ill just now, and it was impossible his Reverence 
could see Jeanie for some time ; but that she need not fear his- 
doing all that was just and proper in her behalf the instant he 
could get her business attended to."— She concluded by offering to 
show Jeanie a room, where she might remain till his Reverence- 
was at leisure. 

Our heroine took the opportunity to request the means of adjust- 
ing and changing her dress. 

The housekeeper, in whose estimation order and cleanliness- 
ranked high among personal virtues, gladly complied with a request 
so reasonable ; and the change of dress which jeanie's bundle fur- 
nished made so important an improvement in her appearance, that 
the old lady hardly knew the soiled and'disordered traveller, whose- 
attire showed the violence she had sustained, in the neat, clean,, 
quiet-looking little Scotchwoman, who now stood before her. En- 
couraged by such a favourable alteration in her appearance, Mrs. 
Dalton ventured to invite Jeanie to partake of her dinner, and was- 
equally pleased with the decent propriety of her conduct during the 
meal. 

" Thou canst read this book, canst thouj young woman ? " said 
the old lady, when their meal was concluded, layingherhand upon 
a large Bible. 

" I hope sae, madam," said Jeanie, surprised at the question ; 
" my father wad hae wanted mony a thing, ere I had wanted that 
schuling." 

" The better sign of him, young woman. There are men here, 
well to pass in the world, would not want their share of a Leicester 
plover, and that's a bag-pudding, if fasting for three hours would 
make all their poor children read the Bible from end to end. Take 
thou the book, then, for my eyes are something dazed, and read 
where thou listest — it's the only book thou canst not happen wrong 
in." 

Jeanie was at first terhpted to turn up the parable of the good 
Samaritan, but her conscience checked her, as if it were a use of 
Scripture, not for her own edification, but to work upon the mind 
of others for the relief of her worldly afflictions ; and under this 
scrupulous sense of duty, she selected, in preference, a chapter of 
the prophet Isaiah, and read it, notwithstanding her northern 
accent and tone, with a devout propriety, which greatly edified. 
Mrs. Dalton. 

"Ah," she said, " an all Scotchwomen were sic as thou ! — but it 
was our luck to get born devils of thy country, I think — every one- 
worse than t' other. If thou knowest of any tidy iass like thysell,. 
that wanted a place, and could bring a good character, and would 
not go laiking about to wakes and fairs, and wore shoes and stock- 
ings all the day round — why, I'll not say but we might find room 
for her at the Rectory. Hast no cousin or sister, lass, that such an 
offer would suit ? " 

This was touching upon a sore point, but Jeanie was spared the 



268 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

pain of replying by the entrance of the same man-servant she had 
seen before. 

" Measter wishes to see the young woman from Scotland," was 
Tummas's address. 

" Go to his Reverence, my dear, as fast as you can, and tell him 
.all your story — his Reverence is a kind man," said Mrs. Dalton. 
" I will fold down the leaf, and make you a cup of tea, with some 
nice muffin, against you come down, and that's what you seldom 
.see in Scotland, girl." 

" Measter's waiting for the young woman," said Tummas, impa- 
tiently. 

" Well, Mr. Jack-Sauce, and what is your business to put in your 
oar? — And how often must I tell you to call Mr. Staunton his 
Reverence, seeing as he is a dignified clergyman, and not be 
jneastering, meastering him, as if he were a little petty squire ? " 

As Jeanie was now at the door, and ready to accompany Tummas, 
the footman said nothing till he got into the passage, when he mut- 
tered, " There are moe masters than one in this house, and I think 
we shall have a mistress too, an Dame Dalton carries it thus." 

Tummas led the way through a more intricate range of passages 
than J.eanie had yet threaded, and ushered her into an apartment 
which was darkened by the closing of most of the window-shutters, 
and in which was a bed with the curtains partly drawn. 

" Here is the young woman, sir," said Tummas. 

" Very well," said a voice from the bed, but not that of his Rever- 
ence ; " be ready to answer the bell, and leave the room." 

" There is some mistake," said Jeanie, confounded at finding 
herself in the apartment of an invalid ; " the servant told me that 
the minister " 

" Don't trouble yourself," said the invalid, " there is no mistake. 
I know more of your affairs than my father, and I can manage 
them better. — Leave the room, Tom." The servant obeyed. — " We 
must not," said the invalid, " lose time, when we have little to lose. 
Open the shutter of that window." 

She did so, and, as he drew aside the curtain of his bed, the 
light fell on his pale countenance, as turban'd with bandages, and 
.dressed in a night-gown, he lay, seemingly exhausted, upon the bed. 

" Look at me," he said, " Jeanie Deans, can you not recollect 
me?" 

" No, sir," said she, full of surprise. " I was never in this country 
before." 

" But I may have been in yours. Think — recollect. I should 
faint did I name the name you are most dearly bound to loathe and 
to detest. Think — remember ! " 

A terrible recollection flashed on Jeanie, which every tone of the 
■speaker confirmed, and which his next words rendered certainty. 

" Be composed — remember Muschat's Cairn, and the moonlight 
night!" 

Jeanie sunk down on a chair, with clasped hands, and gasped in 
agony. 

"Yes, here I lie," he said, " like a crushed snake, writhing with 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 269 

impatience at my incapacity of motion — here I lie, when I ought 
to have been in Edinburgh, trying every means to save a life that is 
dearer to me than my own. — How is your sister ? — how fares it with 
her? — condemned to death, I know it, by this time ! O, the horse 
that carried me safely on a thousand errands of folly and wicked- 
ness, that he should have broke down with me on the only good 
mission I have undertaken for years ! But I must rein in my pas- 
sion — my frame cannot endure it, and I have much to say. Give 
me some of the cordial which stands on that -table. — Why do you 
tremble ? But you have too good cause. — Let it stand — I need it 
not." 

Jeanie, however reluctant, approached him with the cup into 
which she had poured the draught, and could not forbear saying, 
" There is a cordial for the mind, sir, if the wicked will turn from 
their transgressions, and seek to the Physician of souls." 

" Silence ! " he said sternly — " and yet I thank you. But tell me, 
and lose no time in doing so, what you are doing in this country? 
Remember, though I have been your sister's worst enemy, yet I will 
serve her with the best of my blood, and I will serve you for her 
sake ; and no one can serve you to such purpose, for no one can 
know the circumstances so well— so speak without fear." 

" I am not afraid, sir," said Jeanie, collecting her spirits. "I trust 
in God ; and if it pleases Him to redeem my sister's captivity, it is 
all I seek, whosoever be the instrument. But, sir, to be plain with 
you, I dare not use your counsel, unless I were enabled to see that 
it accords with the law which I must rely upon." 

" The devil take the puritan ! " cried George Staunton, for so we 
must now call him, — " I beg your pardon ; but I am naturally im- 
patient, and you drive me mad ! What harm can it possibly do to 
tell me in what situation your sister stands, and your own expecta- 
tions of being able to assist her ? It is time enough to refuse 
my advice when I offer any which you may think improper. I 
speak calmly to you, though 'tis against my nature : — but don't 
urge me to impatience — it will only render me incapable of serving 
Erne." 

There was in the looks and words of this unhappy young man a 
sort of restrained eagerness and impetuosity which seemed to prey 
upon itself, as the impatience of a fiery steed fatigues itself with 
churning upon the bit. After a moment's consideration, it occurred 
to Jeanie that she was not entitled to withhold from him, whether 
on her sister's account or her own, the fatal account of the conse- 
quences of the crime which he had committed, nor to reject such 
advice, being in itself lawful and innocent, as he might be able to 
suggest in the way of remedy. Accordingly, in as few words as 
she could express it, she told the history of her sister's trial and 
condemnation, and of her own journey as far as Newark. He ap- 
peared to listen in the utmost agony of mind, yet repressed every 
violent symptom of emotion, whether by gesture or sound, which 
might have interrupted the speaker, and, stretched on his couch 
like the Mexican monarch on his bed of live coals, only the contor- 
tions of his cheek, and the quivering of his limbs, gave indication 



2 7 o THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

■of his sufferings. To much of what she said he listened with stifled 
groans, as if he were only hearing those miseries confirmed, whose 
fatal reality he had known before ; but when she pursued her tale 
through the circumstances which had interrupted her journey, ex- 
treme surprise and earnest attention appeared to succeed to the 
symptoms of remorse which he had before exhibited. He questioned 
jeanie closely concerning the appearance of the two men, and the 
conversation which she had overheard between the taller of them 
and the woman. 

When Jeanie mentioned the old woman having alluded to her 
foster-son — " It is too true," he said ; " and the source from which 
I derived food, when an infant, must have communicated to me the 
wretched — the fated— propensity to vices that were strangers in my 
own family. — But go on." 

Jeanie passed slightly over her journey in company with Madge, 
having no inclination to repeat what might be the effect of mere 
raving on the part of her companion, and therefore her tale was 
now closed. 

Young Staunton lay for a moment in profound meditation, and 
at length spoke with more composure than he had yet displayed 
during their interview. — " You are a sensible, as well as a good 
young woman, Jeanie Deans, and I will tell you more of my story 
than I have told to anyone. — Story did I call it? — it is a tissue of 
folly, guilt, and misery. — But take notice — I do it because I desire 
your confidence in return — that is, that you will act in this dismal 
matter by my advice and direction. Therefore do I speak." 

" I will do what is fitting for a sister, and a daughter, and a 
Christian woman to do," said Jeanie ; " but do not tell me any 
of your secrets. — It is not good that I should come into your coun- 
sel, or listen to the doctrine which causeth to err." 

" Simple fool ! " said the young man. " Look at me. My head 
is not horned, my foot is not cloven, my hands are not garnished 
with talons ; and, since I am not the very devil himself, what inte- 
rest can any one else have in destroying the hopes with' which you 
comfort or fool yourself? Listen to me patiently, and you will find 
that, when you have heard my counsel, you may go to the seventh 
heaven with it in your pocket, if you have a mind, and not feel your- 
self an ounce heavier in the ascent." 

At the risk of being somewhat heavy, as explanations usually 
prove, we must here endeavour to combine into a distinct narrative, 
information which the invalid communicated in a manner at once 
too circumstantial, and too much broken by passion, to admit of 
our giving his precise words. Part of it, indeed, he read from a 
manuscript, which he had perhaps drawn up for the information of 
his relations after his decease. 

"To make my tale short — this wretched hag — this Margaret 
Murdockson, was the wife of a favourite servant of my father — she 
had been my nurse — her husband was d«ad — she resided in a cot- 
tage near this place — she had a daughter who grew up, and was then 
a beautiful but very giddy girl ; her mother endeavoured to promote 
her marriage with an old and wealthy churl in the neighbourhood— 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 271 

the girl saw me frequently — She was familiar with me, as our con- 
nection seemed to permit — and I — in a word, I wronged her cruelly- 
— It was not so bad as your sister's business, but it was' sufficiently 
villanous — her folly should have been her protection. Soon after 
this I was sent abroad — To do my father justice, if I have turned 
out a fiend it is not his fault — he used the best means. When I re- 
turned, I found the wretched mother and daughter had fallen into 
disgrace, and were chased from this country. — My deep share in 
their shame and misery was discovered — my father used very harsh 
language — we quarrelled. I left his house, and led a life of strange 
adventure, resolving never again to see my father or my father's 
home. 

"And now comes the story! — Jeanie, I put my life into your 
hands, and not only my own life, which, God knows, is not worth 
saving, but the happiness of a respectable old man, and the honour 
of a family of consideration. My love of low society, as such pro- 
pensities as I was cursed with are usually termed, was, I think, of 
an uncommon kind, and indicated a nature, which, if not depraved 
by early debauchery, would have been fit for better things. 1 did 
not so much delight in the wild revel, the low humour, the uncon- 
fined liberty of those with whom I associated, as in the spirit of 
adventure, presence of mind in peril, and sharpness of intellect 
which they displayed in prosecuting their maraudings upon the 

revenue, or similar adventures. Have you looked round this 

rectory ? — is it not a sweet and pleasant retreat ? " 

Jeanie, alarmed at this sudden change of subject, replied in the 
affirmative. 

" Well ! I wish it had been ten thousand fathoms under ground, 
with its church-lands, and tithes, and all that belongs to it. Had it 
not been for this cursed rectory, I should have been permitted to 
follow the bent of my own inclinations and the profession of arms, 
and half the courage and address that I have displayed among 
smugglers and deer-stealers would have secured me an honourable 
rank among my contemporaries. Why did I not go abroad when I 
left this house! — Why did I leave it at all !— why — But it came to 
that point with me that it is madness to look back, and misery to 
look forward ! " 

He paused, and then proceeded with more composure. 

" The chances of a wandering life brought me unhappily to Scot- 
land, to embroil myself in worse and more criminal actions than I 
had yet been concerned in. It was now I became acquainted with 
Wilson, a remarkable man in his station of life ; quiet, composed, 
and resolute, firm in mind, and uncommonly strong in person, gifted 
with a sort of rough eloquence which raised him above his com- 
panions. Hitherto I had been 

' As dissolute as desperate, yet through both 
Were seen some sparkles of a better hope.' 

But it was this man's misfortune, as well as mine, that, notwith- 
standing the difference of our rank and education, he acquired an 
extraordinary and fascinating influence over me, which I can only 



272 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

account for by the calm determination of his character being supe- 
rior to the less sustained impetuosity of mine. Where he led I felt 
myself bound to follow ; and strange was the courage and address 
which he displayed in his pursuits. While I was engaged in despe- 
rate adventures, under so strange and dangerous a preceptor, I 
became acquainted with your unfortunate sister at some sports of 
the young people in the suburbs, which she frequented by stealth — 
and her ruin proved an interlude to the tragic scenes in which I 
was now deeply engaged. Yet this let me say — the villany was not 
premeditated, and I was firmly resolved to do her all the justice 
which marriage could do, so soon as I should be able to extricate 
myself from my unhappy course of life, and embrace some one 
more suited to my birth. I had wild visions —visions of conducting 
her as if to some poor retreat, and introducing her at once to rank 
and fortune she never dreamt of. A friend, at my request, attempted 
a negotiation with my father, which was protracted for some time, 
and renewed at different intervals. At length, and just when I ex- 
pected my father's pardon, he learned by some means or other my 
infamy, painted in even exaggerated colours, which was, Godknows ? 
unnecessary. He wrote me a letter — how it found me out, I know- 
not — enclosing me a sum of money, and disowning me for ever. 
I became desperate — I became frantic — I readily joined Wilson in 
a perilous smuggling adventure in which we miscarried, and was 
willingly blinded by his logic to consider the robbery of the officer 
of the customs in Fife as a fair and honourable reprisal. Hitherto 
I had observed a certain line in my criminality, and stood free of 
assaults upon personal property, but now I felt a wild pleasure in 
disgracing myself as much as possible. 

" The plunder was no object to me. I abandoned that to my 
comrades, and only asked the post of danger. I remember well, 
that when I stood with my drawn sword guarding the door while 
they committed the felony, I had not a thought of my own safety. 
I was only meditating on my sense of supposed wrong from my 
family, my impotent thirst of vengeance, and how it would sound in 
the haughty ears of the family of Willingham, that one of their de- 
scendants, and the heir apparent of their honours, should perish by 
the hands of the hangman for robbing a Scottish gauger of a sum 
not equal to one-fifth part of the money I had in my pocket-book. 
We were taken — I expected no less. We were condemned — that 
also I looked for. But Death, as he approached nearer, looked 
grimly ; and the recollection of your sister's destitute condition 
determined me on an effort to save my life. — I forgot to tell you, 
that in Edinburgh I again met the woman Murdockson and her 
daughter. She had followed the camp when young, and had now, 
under pretence of a trifling traffic, resumed predatory habits, with 
which she had already been too familiar. Our first meeting was 
stormy ; but I was liberal of what money I had, and she forgot, or 
seemed to forget, the injury her daughter had received. The un- 
fortunate girl herself seemed hardly even to know her seducer, far 
less to retain any sense of the injury she had received. Her mind 
is totally alienated, which, according to her mother's account, is 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 273 

sometimes the consequence of an unfavourable confinement. But 
it was my doing . Here was another stone knitted round my neck 
to sink me into the pit of perdition. Every .look— every word of 
this poor creature — her false spirits — her imperfect recollections— 
her allusions to things which she had forgotten, but which were 
recorded in my conscience, were stabs of a poniard — stabs did I 
say? — they were tearing with hot pincers, and scalding the raw 
wound with burning sulphur — they were to be endured however, and 
they i&ere endured. — I return to my prison thoughts. 

" It was not the least miserable of them that your sister's time 
approached. I knew her dread of you and of her father. She often 
said she would die a thousand deaths ere you should know her 
shame — yet her confinement must be provided for. I knew this 
woman Murdockson was an infernal hag, but I thought she loved 
me, and that money would make her true. She had procured a file 
for Wilson, and a spring-saw for me ; and she undertook readily to 
take charge of Effie during her illness, in which she had skill 
•enough to give the necessary assistance. I gave her the money 
which my father had sent me. It was settled that she should receive 
Effie into her house in the meantime, and wait for farther directions 
from me, when I should effect my escape. I communicated this 
purpose, and recommended the old hag to poor Effie by a letter, 
in which I recollect that I endeavoured to support the character of 
Macheath under condemnation — a fine, gay, bold-faced ruffian, who 
is game to the last. Such, and so wretchedly poor, was my ambi- 
tion ! Yet I had resolved to forsake the courses I had been engaged 
in, should I be so fortunate as to escape the gibbet. My design was 
to marry your sister, and go over to the West Indies. I had still a 
considerable sum of money left, and I trusted to be able, in one 
way or other, to provide for myself and my wife. 

" We made the attempt to escape, and by the obstinacy of Wil- 
son, who insisted upon going first, it totally miscarried. The 
undaunted and self-denied manner in which he sacrificed himself to 
redeem his error, and accomplish my escape from the Tolbooth 
Church, you must have heard of — all Scotland rang with it. It was 
a gallant and extraordinary deed — All men spoke of it — all men, 
even those who most condemned the habits and crimes of this self- 
devoted man, praised the heroism of his friendship. I have many 
vices, but cowardice, or want^of gratitude, are none of the number. 
I resolved to requite his generosity, and even your sister's safety 
became a secondary consideration with me for the time. To effect 
Wilson's liberation was my principal object, and I doubted not to 
find the means. 

"Yet I did not forget Effie neither. The bloodhounds of the law 
were so close after me, that I dared not trust myself near any of my 
old haunts, but old Murdockson met me by appointment, and in- 
formed me that your sister had happily been delivered of a boy. I 
charged the hag to keep her patient's mind easy, and let her want 
for nothing that money could purchase, and I retreated to Fife, 
where, among my old associates of Wilson's gang, I hid myself in 
those places of concealment where the men engaged in that despe- 

s 



274 ' THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

rate trade are used to find security for themselves and their un- 
customed goods. Men who are disobedient' both to human and 
divine laws are not always insensible to the claims of courage and 
generosity. We were assured that the mob of Edinburgh, strongly 
moved with the hardship of Wilson's situation, and the gallantry of 
his conduct, would back any bold attempt that might be made to 
rescue him even from the foot of the gibbet. Desperate as the 
attempt seemed, upon my declaring myself ready to lead the onset 
on the guard, I found no want of followers who engaged to stand 
by me, and returned to Lothian, soon followed by some steady as- 
sociates, prepared to act whenever the occasion might require. 

" I have no doubt I should have rescued him from the very noose 
that dangled over his head," he continued with animation, which 
seemed a flash of the interest which he had taken in such exploits ; 
" but amongst other precautions, the magistrates had taken one, 
suggested, as we afterwards learned, by the unhappy wretch 
Porteous, which effectually disconcerted my measures. They an- 
ticipated, by half an hour, the ordinary period for execution ; and, 
as it had been resolved amongst us, that, for fear of observation 
from the officers of justice, we should not show ourselves upon the 
street until the time of action approached, it followed, that all was 
over before our attempt at a rescue commenced. It did commence, 
however, and I gained the scaffold and cut the rope with my own 
hand. It was too late ! The bold, stout-hearted, generous criminal 
was no more — and vengeance was all that remained to us — a ven- 
geance, as I then thought, doubly due from my hand, to whom 
Wilson had given life and liberty when he could as easily have 
secured his own." 

" O, sir," said Jeanie, '' did the Scripture never come into your 
mind, ' Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it ' ? " 

" Scripture ! Why, I had not opened a Bible for five years," 
answered Staunton. 

" Wae's me, sirs," said Jeanie — " and a minister's son, too." 

" It is natural for you to say so ; yet do not interrupt me, but let 
me finish my most accursed history. The beast, Porteous, who kept 
firing on the people long after it had ceased to be necessary, be- 
came the object of their hatred for having overdone his duty, and 
of mine for having done it too well. We — that is, I and the other 
determined friends of Wilson— resolved to be avenged ; but caution 
was necessary. I thought I had been marked by one of the officers, 
and therefore continued to lurk about the vicinity of Edinburgh, 
but without daring to venture within the walls. At length I visited, 
at the hazard of my life, the place where I hoped to find my future 
wife and my son — they were both gone. Dame Murdockson in- 
formed me, that so soon as Effie heard of the miscarriage of the 
attempt to rescue Wilson, and the hot pursuit after me, she fell into 
a brain fever ; and that being one day obliged to go out on some 
necessary business and leave her alone, she had taken that oppor- 
tunity to escape, and she had not seen her since. I loaded her with 
reproaches, to which she listened with the most provoking and 
callous composure ; for it is one of her attributes, that, violent and 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 275 

fierce as she is upon most occasions, there are some in which she 
shows the most imperturbable calmness. I threatened her with 
justice ; she said I had more reason to fear justice than she had. I 
felt she was right, and was silenced. I threatened her with ven- 
geance ; she replied in nearly the same words, that, to judge by 
injuries received, I had more reason to fear her vengeance, than she 
to dread mine. She was again right, and I was left without an 
answer. I flung myself from her in indignation, and employed a 
comrade to make inquiry in the neighbourhood of Saint Leonard's 
concerning your sister ; but ere I received his answer, the opening 
quest of a well-scented terrier of the law drove me from the vicinity 
of Edinburgh, to a more distant and secluded place of conceal- 
ment. A secret and trusty emissary at length brought me the 
account of Porteous's condemnation, and of your sister's imprison- 
ment on a criminal charge ; thus astounding one of mine ears, while 
he gratified the other. 

" I again ventured to the Pleasance — again charged Murdockson 
with treachery to the unfortunate Erne and her child, though I 
could conceive no reason, save that of appropriating the whole of 
the money I had lodged with her. Your narrative throws light on 
this, and shows another motive, not less powerful because less 
evident — the desire of wreaking vengeance on the seducer of her 
daughter, — the destroyer at once of her reason and reputation. 
Great God ! how I wish that, instead of the revenge she made 
choice of, she had delivered me up to the cord ! " 

" But what account did the wretched woman give of Effie and 
the bairn ? " . said Jeanie, who, during this long and agitating 
narrative, had firmness and discernment enough to keep her eye on 
such points as might throw light on her sister's misfortunes. 

" She would give none," said Staunton ; " she said the mother 
made a moonlight flitting from her house, with the infant in her 
arms' — that she had never seen either of them since — that the lass 
might have thrown the child into the North Loch or the Quarry 
Holes for what she knew, and it was like enough she had done so." 

" And how came you to believe that she did not speak the fatal 
truth ? " said Jeanie, trembling. 

" Because, on this second occasion, I saw her daughter, and I 
understood from her, that, in fact, the child had been removed or 
destroyed during the illness of the mother. But all knowledge to 
be got from her is so uncertain and indirect, that I could not collect 
any further circumstances. Only the diabolical character of old 
Murdockson makes me augur the worst." 

" The last account agrees with that given by my poor sister," 
said Jeanie ; "but gang on wi' your ain tale, sir." 

" Of this I am certain," said Staunton, " that Effie, in her senses, 
and with her knowledge, never injured living creature — But what 
could I do in her exculpation?— Nothing— and, therefore, my whole 
thoughts were turned toward her safety. I was under the cursed 
necessity of suppressing my feelings towards Murdockson ; my life 
was in the hag's hand— that I cared not for ; but on my life hung 
that of your sister. I spoke the wretch fair ; I appeared to confide 



276 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

in her ; and to me, so far as I was personally concerned, she gave 
proofs of extraordinary fidelity. I was at first uncertain what 
measures I ought to adopt for your sister's liberation, when the 
general rage excited among the citizens of Edinburgh on account 
of the reprieve of Porteous, suggested to me the daring idea of 
forcing the jail, and at once carrying off your sister from the 
clutches of the law, and bringing to condign punishment a miscre- 
ant, who had tormented the unfortunate Wilson, even in the hour 
of death, as if he had been a wild Indian taken captive by an 
hostile tribe. I flung myself among the multitude in the moment 
of fermentation — so did others among Wilson's mates, who had, 
like me, been disappointed in the hope of glutting their eyes with 
Porteous's execution. All was organized, and I was chosen for the 
captain. I felt not — I do not now feel, compunction for what was 
to be done, and has since been executed." 

" O God forgive ye, sir, and bring ye to a better sense of your 
ways ! " exclaimed Jeanie, in horror at the avowal of such violent 
sentiments. 

" Amen," replied Staunton, " if my sentiments are wrong. But I 
repeat, that, although willing to-aid the deed, I could have wished 
them to have chosen another leader ; because I foresaw that the 
great and general duty of the night would interfere with the assist- 
ance which I proposed to render Effie. I gave a commission, how- 
•ever, to a trusty friend to protect her to a place of safety, so soon 
as the fatal procession had left the jail. But for no persuasions 
which I could use in the hurry of the moment, or which my com- 
rade employed at more length, after the mob had taken a different 
-direction, could the unfortunate girl be prevailed upon to leave the 
prison. His arguments were all wasted upon the infatuated victim, 
and he was obliged to leave her in order to attend to his own safety. 
Such was his account ; but, perhaps, he persevered less steadily in 
his attempt to persuade her than I would have done." 

" Effie was right to remain," said Jeanie ; " and I love her the 
better for it." 

" Why will you say so ? " said Staunton. 

"You cannot understand my reasons, sir, if I should render 
them," answered Jeanie, composedly ; " they that thirst for the 
blood of their enemies have no taste for the well-spring of 
life." 

" My hopes," said Staunton, " were thus a second time disap- 
pointed. My next efforts were to bring her through her trial by 
means of yourself. How I urged it, and where, you cannot have 
forgotten. I do not blame you for your refusal ; it was founded, I 
am convinced, on principle, and not on indifference to your sister's 
fate. For me, judge of me as a man frantic ; I knew not what hand 
to turn to, and all my efforts were unavailing. In this condition, and 
close beset on all sides, I thought of what might be done by means 
of my family and their influence. I fled from Scotland — I reached 
this place — my miserably wasted and unhappy appearance pro- 
cured me from my father that pardon, which a parent finds it so 
hard to refuse, even to the most undeserving son. And here I have 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 277 

awaited in anguish of mind, which the condemned criminal might 
envy, the event of your sister's trial." 
" Without taking any steps for her relief? " said Jeanie. 
" To the last I hoped her case might terminate more favourably ; 
and it is only two days since that the fatal tidings reached me.v My 
resolution was instantly taken. I mounted my best horse with the 
purpose of making the utmost haste to London, and there com- 
pounding with Sir Robert Walpole for your sister's safety, by sur- 
rendering to him, in the person of the heir of the family of Willing- 
ham, the notorious George Robertson, the accomplice of Wilson, 
the breaker of the Tolbooth prison, and the well-known leader of 
the Porteous mob." 
" But would that save my sister ?" said Jeanie, in astonishment. 
" It would, as I should drive my bargain," said Staunton. 
" Queens love revenge as well as their subjects — Little as you seem 
to esteem it, it is a poison which pleases all palates, from the prince 
to the peasant. Prime ministers love no less the power of pleasing 
sovereigns by gratifying their passions. The life of an obscure 
village girl ! Why, I might ask the best of the crown-jewels for 
laying the head of such an insolent conspiracy at the foot of her 
majesty, with a certainty of being gratified. All my other plans 
have failed, but this could not— Heaven is just, however, and would 
not honour me with making this voluntary atonement for the injury' 
I have done your sister. I had not rode ten miles, when my horse, 
the best and most sure-footed animal in this country, fell with me 
on a level piece of road, as if he had been struck by a cannon-shot. 
I was greatly hurt, aha was brought back here in the miserable 
condition in which you now see me." 

As young Staunton had come to the conclusion, the servant 
opened the door, and, with a voice which seemed intended rather 
for a signal, than merely the announcing of a visit, said, " His 
Reverence, sir, is coming upstairs to wait upon you." 

"For God's sake, hide yourself, Jeanie," exclaimed Staunton, "in 
that dressing-closet ! " 

" No, sir," said Jeanie ; " as I am here for nae ill, I canna take 
the shame of hiding mysell frae the master 0' the house." 
" But, good Heavens ! " exclaimed George Staunton, " do but 

.consider " 

Ere he could complete the sentence his father entered the 
apartment. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

And now, will pardon, comfort, kindness, draw 
The youth from vice ? will honour, duty, law ? 

Crabbe. 

Jeanie arose from her seat, and made her quiet reverence, when 
the elder Mr. Staunton entered the apartment. His astonish- 
ment was extreme at finding his son in such company. 

" I perceive, madam, I have made a mistake respecting you, and 



278 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

ought to have left the task of interrogating you, and of righting your 
wrongs, to this young man, with whom, doubtless, you have been 
.formerly acquainted." 

" It's unwitting on my part that I am here," said Jeanie ; " the 
servant told me his master wished to speak with me." 

" There goes the purple coat over my ears," murmured Tummas. 
"D— n her, why must she needs speak the truth, when she could 
have as well said anything else she had a mind ? " 

" George," said Mr. Staunton, " if you are still — as you have ever 
been — lost to all self-respect, you might at least have spared your 
father, and your father's house such a disgraceful scene as this." 

" Upon my life — upon my soul, sir ! " said George, throwing his 
feet over the side of the bed, and starting from his recumbent 
posture. 

" Your life, sir," interrupted his father, with melancholy stern- 
ness, — " What sort of life has it been ? — Your soul ! alas ! what 
regard have you ever paid to it ? Take care to reform both ere 
offering either as pledges of your sincerity." 

" On my honour, sir, you do me wrong," answered George 
Staunton ; " I have been all that you can call me that's bad, but in 
the present instance you do me injustice. By my honour you do ! " 

" Your honour !" said his father, and turned from him, with a look 
of the most upbraiding contempt, to Jeanie. " From you, young 
woman, I neither ask nor expect any explanation ; but as a father 
alike and as a clergyman, I request your departure from this house. 
If your romantic story has been other than a pretext to find admis- 
sion into it, (which, from the society in which you first appeared, I 
may be permitted to doubt,) you will find a justice of peace 
within two miles, with whom, more properly than with me, you may 
lodge your complaint." 

" This shall not be," said George Staunton, starting up to his 
feet. " Sir, you are naturally kind and humane — you shall not 
become cruel and inhospitable on my account. Turn out that 
eaves-dropping rascal," pointing to Thomas, " and get what hart- 
shorn drops, or what better receipt you have against fainting, and I 
will explain to you in two words the connection betwixt this young 
woman and me. She shall not lose her fair character through 'me. • 
I have done too much mischief to her family already, and I know 
too well what belongs to the loss of fame." 

" Leave the room, sir," said the Rector to the servant ; and when 
the man had obeyed, he carefully shut the door behind him. Then 
addressing his son, he said sternly, " Now, sir, what new proof of 
your infamy have you to impart to me ? " 

Young Staunton was about to speak, but it was one of those 
moments when those, who, like Jeanie Deans, possess the advan- 
tage of a steady courage and unruffled temper, can assume the supe- 
rioiity over more ardent but less determined spirits. 

" Sir," she said to the elder Staunton, " ye have an undoubted 
right to ask your ain son to render a reason of his conduct. But 
respecting me, I am but a wayfaring traveller, no ways obligated or 
indebted to you, unless it be for the meal of meat which, in my ain 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 279 

country, is willingly gien by rich or poor, according to their ability, 
to those who need it ; and for which, forby that, I am willing to 
make payment, if I didna think it would be an affront to offer siller 
in a house like this — only I dinna ken the fashions of the country." 

"This is all very well, young woman," said the Rector, <i good 
deal surprised, and unable to conjecture whether to impute Jeanie's 
language to simplicity or impertinence — " this may be all very well 
— but let me bring it to a point. Why do you stop this young 
man's mouth, and prevent his communicating to his father and his 
best friend an explanation (since he says he has one) of circum- 
stances which seem in themselves not a little suspicious ? " 

" He may tell of his ain affairs what he likes," answered Jeanie ; 
" but my family and friends have nae richt to hae ony stories told 
anent them without their express desire ; and, as they canna be 
here to speak for themselves, I entreat ye wadna ask Mr. George 
Rob — I mean Staunton, or whatever his name is, ony questions 
anent me or my folk ; for I maun be free to tell you, that he will 
neither have the bearing of a Christian or a gentleman, if he answers 
you against my express desire." 

'' This is the most extraordinary thing I ever met with/' said the 
Rector, as, after fixing his eyes keenly on the placid, yet modest 
countenance of Jeanie, he turned them suddenly upon his son. 
"What have you to say, sir?" 

" That I feel I have been too hasty in my promise, sir," answered 
George Staunton ; " I have no title .to make any communications 
respecting the affairs of this young person's family without her 
assent." 

The elder Mr. Staunton turned his eyes from one to the other 
, with marks of surprise. 

" This is more, and worse, I fear," he said, addressing his son, 
" than one of your frequent and disgraceful connections — I insist 
upon knowing the mystery." 

" I haye already said, sir," replied his son rather sullenly, " that I 
have no title to mention the affairs of this young woman's family 
without her consent." 

"And I hae nae mysteries to explain, sir," said Jeanie, "but only 
to pray you, as a preacher of the gospel and a gentleman, to permit 
me to go safe to the next public-house on the Lunnon road." 

" I shall take care of your safety," said young Staunton, "you 
need ask that favour from no one." 

" Do you say so before my face ? " said the justly-incensed father. 
" Perhaps, sir, you intend to fill up the cup of disobedience and 
profligacy by forming a low and disgraceful marriage ? But let me 
bid you beware." 

" If you were feared for sic a thing happening wi' me, sir," said 
Jeanie, " I can only say, that not for all the land that lies between 
the twa ends of the rainbow wad I be the woman that should wed 
your son." 

" There is something very singular in all this," said the elder 
Staunton ; " follow me into the next room, young woman." 
. " Hear me speak first," said the young man. " I have but one 



s8o THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

word to say. I confide entirely in your prudence ; tell my father as 
much or as little of these matters as you will, he shall know neither 
more nor less from me." 

His father darted at him a glance of indignation, which softened 
into sorrow as he saw him sink down on the couch, exhausted with 
the scene he had undergone. He left the apartment, and Jeanie 
followed him, George Staunton raising himself as she passed the 
door-way, and pronouncing the word, " Remember ! " in a tone as 
monitory as it was uttered by Charles I. upon the scaffold. The 
elder Staunton led the way into a small parlour, and shut the door. 

" Young woman," said he, " there is something in your face and 
appearance that marks both sense and simplicity, and, if I am not 
deceived, innocence also — Should it be otherwise, I can only say, 
you are the most accomplished hypocrite I have ever seen — I ask 
to know no secret that you have unwillingness to divulge, least of 
all those which concern my son. His conduct has given me too 
much unhappiness to permit me to hope comfort or satisfaction 
from him. If you are such as I suppose you, believe me, that what- 
ever unhappy circumstances may have connected you with George 
Staunton, the sooner you break them through the better." 

" I think 1 understand your meaning, sir," replied Jeanie ; " and 
as ye are sae frank as to speak o' the young gentleman in sic a way, 
I must needs say that it is but the second time of my speaking wi' 
him in our lives, and what I hae heard frae him on these twa occa- 
sions has been such that I never wish to hear the like again." 

" Then it is your real intention to leave this part of the country, 
and proceed to London ? " said the Rector. 

" Certainly, sir ; for I may say, in one sense, that the avenger of 
blood is behind me ; and if I were but assured against mischief by 
the way " 

" I have made some inquiry," said the clergyman, " after the 
suspicious characters you described. They have left their place of 
rendezvous ; but as they may be lurking in the neighbourhood, and 
as you say you have special reason to apprehend violence from 
them, I will put you under the charge of a steady person, who will 
protect you as far as Stamford, and see you into a light coach, 
which goes from thence to London." 

" A coach is not for the like of me, sir," said Jeanie ; to whom the 
idea of a stage-coach was unknown, as, indeed, they were then only 
used in the neighbourhood of London. 

Mr. Staunton briefly explained that she would find that mode 
of conveyance more commodious, cheaper, and more safe, than 
travelling on horseback. She expressed her gratitude with so 
much singleness of heart, that he was induced to ask her whether 
she wanted the pecuniary means of prosecuting her journey. She 
thanked him, but said she had enough for her purpose ; and, in- 
deed, she had husbanded her stock with great care. This reply 
served also to remove some doubts, which naturally enough still 
floated in Mr. Staunton's mind, respecting her character and 
real purpose, and satisfied him, at least, that money did not enter 
into her scheme of deception, if an impostor she should prove. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 281 

He next requested to know what part of the city she wished to 
go to. 

" To a very decent merchant, a cousin 0' my ain, a Mrs. Glass, 
sir, that sells snuff and tobacco, at the sign o' the Thistle, somegate 
in the toun." 

Jeanie communicated this intelligence with a feeling that a 
connection so respectable ought to give her consequence in the 
eyes of Mr. Staunton ; and she was a good deal surprised when he 
answered. 

" And is this woman your only acquaintance in London, my poor 
girl? and have you really no better knowledge where ,she is to 
be found ? * 

" I was gaun to seek the Duke Of Argyle, forby Mrs. Glass," said 
Jeanie ; " and if your honour thinks it would be best to go there 
first, and get some of his grace's folk to show me my cousin's 
shop " 

" Are you acquainted with any of the Duke of Argyle's people ? " 
said the Rector. 

"No, sir." 

Her brain must be something touched after all, or it would be 
impossible for her to rely on such introductions. — " Well," said he 
aloud, " I must not inquire into the cause of your journey, and so I 
cannot be fit to give you advice how to manage it. But the land- 
lady of the house where the coach stops is a very decent person ; 
and as I use her house sometimes, I will give you a recommenda- 
tion to her." 

Jeanie thanked him for his kindness with her best courtesy, and 
said, " That with- his honour's line, and ane from worthy Mrs. 
Bickerton, that keeps the Seven Stars at York, she did not doubt 
to be well taken out in Lunnon." 

" And now," said he, " I presume you will be desirous to set out 
immediately." 

"If I had been in an inn, sir, or any suitable resting-place," 
answered Jeanie, " I wad not have presumed to use the Lord's day 
for travelling ; but as I am on a journey of mercy, I trust my doing 
so will not be imputed." 

"You may, if you choose, remain with Mrs. Dalton for the 
evening ; but I desire you will have no further correspondence with 
my son, who is not a proper counsellor for a person of your age, 
whatever your difficulties may be." 

" Your honour speaks ower truly in that," said Jeanie ; " it was 
not with my will that I spoke wi' him just now, and — not to wish 
the gentleman onything but gude — I never wish to see him between 
the een again." 

" If you please," added 'the Rector, "as you seem to be a seri- 
ously disposed young woman, you may attend family worship in the 
hall this evening." 

" I thank your honour," said Jeanie, " but I am doubtful if my 
attendance would be to edification." 

" How ! " said the Rector ; " so young, and already unfortunate 
enough to have doubts upon the duties of religion !" 



28s THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" God forbid, sir," replied Jeanie; "it is not for that ; but I have 
been bred in the faith of the suffering remnant of the presbyterian 
doctrine in Scotland, and I am doubtful if I can lawfully attend 
upon your fashion of worship, seeing it has been testified against 
by many precious souls of our kirk, and specially by my worthy 
father." 

" Well, my good girl," said the Rector, with a good-humoured 
smile, " far be it from me to put any force upon your conscience ; 
and yet you ought to recollect that the same divine grace dispenses 
its streams to other kingdoms as well as to Scotland. As it is as 
essential to our spiritual, as water to our earthly wants, its springs, 
various in character, yet alike efficacious in virtue, are to be found 
in abundance throughout the Christian world." 

"Ah, but," said Jeanie, "though the waters may be alike, yet, 
with your worship's leave, the blessing upon them may not be 
equal. It would have been in vain for Naaman the Syrian leper to 
have bathed in the Pharpar and Abana, rivers of Damascus, when 
it was only the waters of Jordan that were sanctified for the cure." 

" Well," said the Rector, " we will not enter upon the great de- 
bate betwixt our national churches at present. We must endeavour 
to satisfy you that, at least, amongst our errors, we preserve Christian 
charity, and a desire to assist our brethren." 

He then ordered Mrs. Dalton into his presence, and consigned 
Jeanie to her particular charge, with directions to be kind to her, 
and with assurances, that, early in the morning, a trusty guide and 
a good horse should be ready to conduct her to Stamford. He 
took a serious and dignified, yet kind leave of her, wishing her full 
success in the objects of her journey, which he said he doubted not 
were laudable, from the soundness of thinking which she had dis- 
played in conversation. 

Jeanie was again conducted by the housekeeper to her own 
apartment. But the evening was not destined to pass over without 
further torment from young Staunton. A paper was slipped into 
her hand by the faithful Tummas, which intimated his young 
master's desire, or rather demand, to see her instantly, and assured 
her he had provided against interruption. 

" Tell your young master," said Jeanie, openly, and regardless of 
all the winks and signs by which Tummas strove to make her 
comprehend that Mrs. Dalton was not to be admitted into the 
secret of the correspondence, " that I promised faithfully to his 
worthy father that I would not see him again." 

" Tummas," said Mrs. Dalton, " I think you might be much more 
creditably employed, considering the coat you wear, and the house 
you live in, than to be carrying messages between your young 
master and girls that chance to be in this house." 

" Why, Mrs. Dalton, as to that, I was hired to carry messages, 
and not to ask any questions about them ; and it's not for the like 
of me to refuse the young gentleman's bidding, if he were a little 
wildish or so. If there was harm meant, there's no harm done, 
you see." 

" However," said Mrs. Dalton, " I gie you fair warning, Tummas 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 283 

Ditton, that an I catch thee at this work again, his Reverence shall 
make a clear house of you." 

Thomas retired, abashed and in dismay. The rest of the evening 
passed away without anything worthy of notice. 

Jeanie enjoyed the comforts of a good bed and a sound sleep 
with grateful satisfaction, after the perils and hardships of the pre- 
ceding day ; and such was her fatigue, that she slept soundly until 
six o'clock, when she was awakened by Mrs. Dalton, who acquainted 
her that her guide and horse were ready, and in attendance. She 
hastily rose, and, after her morning devotions, was soon ready to 
resume her travels. The motherly care of the housekeeper had 
provided an early breakfast, and, after she had partaken of this 
refreshment, she found herself safe seated on a pillion behind a 
stout Lincolnshire peasant, who was, besides, armed with pistols, to 
protect her against any violence which might be offered. 

They trudged along in silence for a mile or two along a country 
road, which conducted them, by hedge and gate-way, into the 
principal highway, a little beyond Grantham. At length her master 
of the horse asked her whether her name was not Jean, or Jane, 
Deans. She answered in the affirmative, with some surprise. 
" Then here's a bit of a note as concerns you," said the man, hand- 
ing it over his left shoulder. " It's from young master, as I judge, 
and every man about Willingham is fain to pleasure him either for 
love or fear ; for he'll come to be landlord at last, let them say what 
they like." 

Jeanie broke the seal of the note, which was addressed to her, 
and read as follows : 

" You refuse to see me. I suppose you are shocked at my cha- 
racter ; but, in painting myself such as I am, you should give me 
credit for my sincerity. I am, at least, no hypocrite. You refuse, 
however, to see me, and your conduct may be natural — but is it 
wise ? I have expressed my anxiety to repair your sister's misfor- 
tunes at the expense of my honour, — my family's honour — my own 
life ; and you think me too debased to be admitted even to sacrifice 
what I have remaining of honour, fame, and life, in her cause. 
Well, if the offer be despised, the victim is still equally at hand ; 
and perhaps there may be justice in the' decree of Heaven, that I 
shall not have the melancholy credit of appearing to make this 
sacrifice out of my own free good-will. You, as you have declined 
my concurrence, must take the whole upon yourself. Go, then, to 
the Duke of Argyle, and, when other arguments fail you, tell him 
you have it in your power to bring to condign punishment the most 
active conspirator in the Porteous mob. He will hear you on this 
topic,, should he be deaf to every other. Make your own terms, for 
they will be at your own making. You know where I am to be 
found ; and you may be assured I will not give you the dark side 
of the hill, as at Muschat's Cairn ; I have no thoughts of stirring 
from the house I was born in ; like the hare, I shall be worried in 
the seat I started from. I repeat it — make your own terms. I 
■seed not remind you to ask your sister's life, for that you will do of 
course ; but make terms of advantage for yourself— ask wealth and 



284 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

reward— office and income for Butler— ask anything — you will get 
anything — and all for delivering to the hands of the executioner a 
man most deserving of his office ;— one who, though young in years, 
is old in wickedness, and whose most earnest desire is, after the 
storms of an unquiet life, to sleep and be at rest." 

This extraordinary letter was subscribed with the initials G. S. 

Jeanie read it over once or twice with great attention, which the 
slow pace of the horse, as he stalked through a deep lane, enabled 
her to do with facility. 

When she had perused this billet, her first employment was to 
tear it into as small pieces as possible, and disperse these pieces in 
the air by a few at a time, so that a document containing so peril- 
ous a secret might not fall into any other person's hand. 

The question how far, in point of extremity, she was entitled to 
save her sister's life by sacrificing that of a person who, though 
guilty towards the state, had done her no injury, formed the next 
earnest and most painful subject of consideration. In one sense, 
indeed, it seemed as if denouncing the guilt of Staunton, the cause 
of her sister's errors and misfortunes, would have been an act of 
just, and even providential retribution. But Jeanie, in the strict 
and severe tone of morality in which she was educated, had to 
consider not only the general aspect of a proposed action, but its 
justness and fitness in relation to the actor, before she could be, 
according to her own phrase, free to enter upon it. What right had 
she to make a barter between the lives of Staunton and of Effie, 
and to sacrifice the one for the safety of the other ? His guilt — 
that guilt for which he was amenable to the laws — was a crime 
against the public indeed, but it was not against her. 

Neither did it seem to her that his share in the death of Porteous, 
though her mind revolted at the idea of using violence to any one, 
was in the relation of a common murder, against the perpetrator of 
which every one is called to aid the public magistrate. That 
violent action was blended with many circumstances, which, in the 
eyes of those in Jeanie's rank of life, if they did not altogether de- 
prive it of the character of guilt, softened, at least, its most atrocious 
features. The anxiety of the government to obtain conviction of 
some of the offenders, had but served to increase the public feeling 
which connected the action, though violent and irregular, with the 
idea of ancient national independence. The rigorous measures 
adopted or proposed against the city of Edinburgh, the ancient 
metropolis of Scotland — the extremely unpopular and injudicious 
measure of compelling the Scottish clergy, contrary to their prin- 
ciples and sense of duty, to promulgate from the pulpit the reward 
offered for the discovery of the perpetrators of this slaughter, had 
produced on the public mind the opposite consequences from what 
were intended ; and Jeanie felt conscious, that whoever should 
lodge information concerning that event, and for whatsoever pur- 
pose it might be done, it would be considered as an act of treason 
against the independence of Scotland. With the fanaticism of the 
Scottish presbyterians, there was always mingled a glow of national 
feeling, and Jeanie trembled at the idea of her name being handed 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 285 

down to posterity with that of the " fause Monteath," and one or 
two others, who, having deserted and betrayed the cause of their 
country, are damned to perpetual remembrance and execration 
among its peasantry. Yet, to part with Effie's life once more, when 
a word spoken might save it, pressed severely on the mind of her 
affectionate sister. 

" The Lord support and direct me ! " said Jeanie, " for it seems 
to be His will to try me with difficulties far beyond my ain 
strength." 

While this thought passed through Jeanie's mind, her guard, 
tired of silence, began to show some inclination to be communica- 
tive. He seemed a sensible, steady peasant, but not having more 
delicacy or prudence than is common to those in his situation, he, 
of course, chose the Willingham family as the subject of his conver- 
sation. From this man Jeanie learned some particulars of which 
she had hitherto been ignorant, and which we will briefly recapitu- 
late for the information of the reader. 

The father of George Staunton had been bred a soldier, and, 
during service in the West Indies, had married the heiress of a 
wealthy planter. By this lady he had an only child, George 
Staunton, the unhappy young man who has been so often men- 
tioned in this narrative. He passed the first part of his early youth 
under the charge of a doting mother, and in the society of negro 
slaves, whose study it was to gratify his every caprice. His father 
was a man of worth and sense ; but as he alone retained tolerable 
health among the officers of the regiment he belonged to, he was 
much engaged with his duty. Besides, Mrs. Staunton was beauti- 
ful and wilful, and enjoyed but delicate health ; so that it was 
difficult for a man of affection, humanity, and a quiet disposition, 
to struggle with her on the point of her over-indulgence to an only 
child. Indeed, what Mr. Staunton did do towards counteracting 
the baneful effects of his wife's system, only tended to render it 
more pernicious ; for every restraint imposed on the boy in his 
father's presence, was compensated by treble licence during his 
absence. So that George Staunton acquired, even in childhood, 
the habit of regarding his father as a rigid censor, from whose 
severity he was desirous of emancipating himself as soon and ab- 
solutely as possible. 

When he was about ten years old, and when his mind had re- 
ceived all the seeds of those evil weeds which afterwards grew 
apace, his mother died, and his father, half heart-broken, returned 
to England. To sum up her imprudence and unjustifiable indul- 
gence, she had contrived to place a considerable part of her fortune 
at her son's exclusive control or disposal, in consequence of which 
management, George Staunton had not been long in England till 
he learned his independence, and how to abuse it. His father had 
endeavoured to rectify. the defects of his education by placing him 
in a well-regulated seminary. But although he showed some capa- 
city for learning, his riotous conduct soon became intolerable to 
his teachers. He found means (too easily afforded to all youths who 
have certain expectations) of procuring such a command of money 



286 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

as enabled him to anticipate in boyhood the frolics and folies of a 
more mature age, and, with these accomplishments, he was re- 
turned on his father's hands as a profligate boy, whose example 
might ruin a hundred. 

The elder Mr. Staunton, whose mind, since his wife's death, had 
been tinged with a melancholy, which certainly his son's conduct 
did not tend to dispel, had taken orders, and was inducted by his 
brother Sir William Staunton into the family living of Willingham. 
The revenue was a matter of consequence to him, for he derived 
little advantage from the estate of his late wife ; and his own for- 
tune was that of a younger brother. 

He took his son to reside with him at the rectory, but he soon 
found that his disorders rendered him an intolerable inmate. And 
as the young men of his own rank would not endure the purse-proud 
insolence of the Creole, he fell into that taste for low society, which 
is worse than "pressing to death, whipping, or hanging." His 
father sent him abroad, but he only returned wilder and more des- 
perate than before. It is true, this unhappy youth was not without 
his good qualities. He had lively wit, good temper, reckless gene- 
rosity, and manners which, while he was under restraint, might pass 
well in society. But all these availed him nothing. He was so well 
acquainted with the turf, the gaming-table, the cock-pit, and every 
worse rendezvous of folly and dissipation, that his mother's fortune 
was spent before he was twenty-one, and he was soon in debt and 
in distress. His early history may be concluded in the words of our 
British Juvenal, when describing a similar character : — 

Headstrong, determined in his own career, 
He thought reproof unjust, and truth severe, 
The soul's disease was to its crisis come, 
He first abused, and then abjured his home ; 
And when he chose a vagabond to be, 
He made his shame his glory, " I'll be free ! " 

" And yet 'tis pity on Measter George, too,'' continued the honest 
boor, " for he has an open hand, and winna let a poor body want 
an he has it." 

The virtue of profuse generosity, by which, indeed, they them- 
selves are most directly advantaged, is readily admitted by the 
vulgar as a cloak for many sins. 

At Stamford our heroine was deposited in safety by her commu- 
nicative guide. She obtained a place in the coach, which, although 
termed a light one, and accommodated with no fewer than six 
horses, only reached London on the afternoon of the second day. 
The recommendation of the elder Mr. Staunton procured Jeanie a 
civil reception at the inn where the carriage stopped, and, by the 
aid of Mrs. Bickerton's correspondent, she found out her friend and 
relative Mrs. Glass, by whom she was kindly received and hospit- 
ably entertained. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 257 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

My name is Argyle, you may well think it strange, 

To live at the court and never to change. Ballad. 

Few names deserve more honourable mention in the history of 
Scotland, during this period, than that of John, Duke of Argyle and 
Greenwich. His talents as a statesman and a. soldier were gene- 
rally admitted ; he was not without ambition,, but "without the 
illness that attends it " — without that irregularity of thought and 
aim, which often excites great men, in his peculiar situation, (for it 
was a very peculiar one,) to grasp the means of raising themselves 
to power, at the risk of throwing a kingdom into confusion. Pope 
has distinguished him as 

" Argyle, the state's whole thunder born to wield, 
And shake alike the senate and the field." 

He was alike free from the ordinary vices of statesmen, falsehood, 
namely, and dissimulation ; and from those of warriors, inordinate 
and violent thirst after self-aggrandisement. 

Scotland, his native country, stood at this time in a very preca- 
rious and doubtful situation. She was indeed united to England, 
but the cement had not had time to acquire consistence. The irri- 
tation of ancient wrongs still subsisted, and betwixt the fretful 
jealousy of the Scottish, and the supercilious disdain of the English, 
quarrels repeatedly occurred, in the course of which the national 
league, so important to the safety of both, was in the utmost danger 
of being dissolved. Scotland had, besides, the disadvantage of 
being divided into intestine factions, which hated each other bit- 
terly, and waited but a signal to break forth into action. 

In such circumstances, another man, with the talents and rank 
of Argyle, but without a mind so happily regulated, would have 
sought to rise from the earth in the whirlwind, and direct its fury. 
He chose a course more safe and more honourable. 

Soaring above the petty distinctions of faction, his voice was 
raised, whether in office or opposition, for those measures which 
were at once just and lenient. His high military talents enabled 
him, during the memorable year 171 5, to render such services to the 
house of Hanover, as, perhaps, were too great to be either acknow- 
ledged or repaid. He had employed, too, his utmost influence in 
softening the consequences of that insurrection to the unfortunate 
gentlemen, whom a mistaken sense of loyalty had engaged in the 
affair, and was rewarded by the esteem and affection of his country 
in an uncommon degree. This popularity with a discontented and 
warlike people, was supposed to be a subject of jealousy at court, 
where the power to become dangerous is sometimes of itself ob- 
noxious, though the inclination is not united with it. Besides, the 
Duke of Argyle's independent and somewhat haughty mode of 
expressing himself in Parliament, and acting in public, were ill cal- 
culated to attract royal favour. He was, therefore, always respected, 



288 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

and often employed ; but he was not a favourite of George the 
Second, his consort, or his ministers. At several different periods 
in his life, the Duke might be considered as in absolute disgrace at 
court, although he could hardly be said to be a declared member 
of opposition. This rendered him the dearer to Scotland, because 
it was usually in her cause that he incurred the displeasure of his 
sovereign ; and upon this very occasion of the Porteous mob, the 
animated and eloquent opposition which he had offered to the 
severe measures which were about to be adopted towards the city 
of Edinburgh, was the more gratefully received in that metropolis, 
as it was understood that the Duke's interposition had given per- 
sonal offence to Queen Caroline. 

His conduct upon this occasion, as, indeed, that of all the Scottish 
members of the legislature, with one or two unworthy exceptions, 
had been in the highest degree spirited. The popular tradition, 
concerning his reply to Queen Caroline, has been given already, 
and some fragments of his speech against the Porteous bill are still 
remembered. He retorted upon the Chancellor, Lord Hard- 
wicke, the insinuation that he had stated himself in this case rather 
as a party than as a judge : — " I appeal," said Argyle, " to the 
House — to the nation, if I can be justly branded with the infamy of 
being a jobber or a partisan. Have I been a briber of votes ? — a 
buyer of boroughs ? — the agent of corruption for any purpose, or 
on behalf of any party ? — Consider my life ; examine my actions in 
the field and in the cabinet, and see where there lies a blot that 
can attach to my honour. I have shown myself the friend of my 
country — the loyal subject of my king. I am ready to do so again, 
without an instant's regard to the frowns or smiles of a court. I 
have experienced both, and am prepared with indifference for 
either. I have given my reasons for opposing this bill, and have 
made it appear that it is repugnant to the international treaty of 
union, to the liberty of Scotland, and, reflectively, to that of Eng- 
land, to common justice, to common sense, and to the public inte- 
rest. Shall the metropolis of Scotland, the capital of an inde- 
pendent nation, the residence of a long line of monarchs, by whom 
that noble city was graced and dignified — shall such a city, for the 
fault of an obscure and unknown body of rioters, be deprived of its 
honours and its privileges — its gates and its guards ? — and shall a 
native Scotsman tamely behold the havoc ? I glory, my Lords, in 
opposing such unjust rigour, and reckon it my dearest pride and 
honour to stand up in defence of my native country, while thus laid 
open to undeserved shame and unjust spoliation." 

Other statesmen and orators, both Scottish and English, used 
the same arguments, and the bill was gradually stripped of its 
most oppressive and' obnoxious clauses, and at length ended in a 
fine upon the city of Edinburgh in favour of Porteous's widow. So 
that, as somebody observed at the time, the whole of these fierce 
debates ended in making the fortune of an old cook-maid, such 
having been the good woman's original capacity. 

The court, however, did not forget the baffle they had received in 
this affair, and the Duke of Argyle, who had contributed so much 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 289 

to it, was thereafter considered as a person in disgrace. It is neces- 
sary to place these circumstances under the reader's observation, 
both because they are connected with the preceding and subsequent 
part of our narrative. 

The Duke was alone in his study, when one of his gentlemen ac- 
quainted him, that a country-girl, from Scotland, was desirous of 
speaking with his Grace. 

" A country-girl, and from Scotland !" said the Duke; "what 
can have brought the silly fool to London ? — Some lover pressed 
and sent to sea, or some stock sunk in the South-Sea funds, or some 
such hopeful concern, I suppose, and then nobody to manage the 
matter but MacCallummore. — Well, this same popularity has its in- 
conveniences. — However, show our countrywoman up, Archibald — 
it is ill manners to keep her in attendance." 

A young woman of rather low stature, and whose countenance 
might be termed very modest and pleasing in expression, though 
sun-burnt, somewhat freckled, and not possessing regular features, 
was ushered into the splendid library. She wore the tartan plaid of" 
her country, adjusted so as partly to cover her head, and partly to 
fall back over her shoulders. A quantity of fair hair, disposed with, 
great simplicity and neatness, appeared in front of her round and 
good-humoured face, to which the solemnity of her errand, and her 
sense of the Duke's rank and importance, gave an appearance of 
deep awe, but not of slavish fear, or fluttered bashfulness. The rest, 
of Jeanie's dress was in the style of Scottish maidens of her own 
class ; but arranged with that scrupulous attention to neatness and 
cleanliness, which we often find united with that purity of mind, of 
which it is a natural emblem. 

She stopped near the entrance of the room, made her deepest 
reverence, and crossed her hands upon her bosom, without uttering 
a syllable. The Duke of Argyle advanced towards her ; and, if she 
admired his^graceful deportment and rich dress, decorated with the, 
orders which had been deservedly bestowed on him, his courteous 
manner, and quick and intelligent cast of countenance, he on his 
part was not less, or less deservedly, struck with the quiet simpli- 
city and modesty expressed in the dress, manners, and countenance 
of his humble countrywoman. 

"Did you wish to speak with me, my bonny lass?" said the 
Duke, using the encouraging epithet which at once acknowledged 
the connexion betwixt them as country-folk ; " or, did you wish to 
see the Duchess ?" 

" My business is with your honour, my Lord — I mean your Lord- 
ship's Grace." 

" And what is it, my good girl ? " said the Duke, in the same mild 
and encouraging tone of voice. Jeanie looked at the attendant. 
" Leave us, Archibald," said the Duke, " and wait in the anteroom." 
The domestic retired. " And now sit down, my good lass," said 
the Duke ; " take your breath — take your time, and tell me what you 
have got to say. I. guess by your dress, you are just come up from 
poor Scotland — Did you come through the streets in your tartan 
plaid?" 

T 



2go THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" No, sir," said Jeanie ; " a friend brought me in ane o' their 
street coaches — a very decent woman," she added, her courage in- 
creasing as she became familiar with the sound of her own voice 
in such a presence; "your Lordship's Grace kens her — it's Mrs. 
Glass, at the sign o' the Thistle." 

" O, my worthy snuff-merchant — I have always a chat with Mrs. 
Glass when I purchase my Scotch high-dried. — Well, but your 
business, my bonny woman — time and tide, you know, wait for 
no one." 

" Your honour — I beg your Lordship's pardon — I mean your 
Grace," — for it must be noticed, that this matter of addressing the 
Duke by his appropriate title had been anxiously inculcated upon 
Jeanie by her friend Mrs. Glass, in whose eyes it was a matter of 
such importance, that her last words, as Jeanie left the coach, were, 
" Mind to say your Grace ; " and Jeanie, who had scarcely ever in 
her life spoke to a person of higher quality than the Laird of Dum- 
biedikes, found great difficulty in arranging her language according 
to the rules of ceremony. 

The Duke, who saw her embarrassment, said, with his usual 
affability, " never mind my grace, lassie' ; just speak out a plain 
tale, and show you have a Scotch tongue in your head." 

" Sir, I am muckle obliged — Sir, I am the sister of that poor un- 
fortunate criminal, Effie Deans, who is ordered for execution at 
Edinburgh." 

" Ah ! " said the Duke, " I have heard of that unhappy story, I 
think — a case of child-murder, under a special act of parliament — 
Duncan Forbes mentioned it at dinner the other day. 

" And I was come up frae the north, sir, to see what could be 
done for her in the way of getting a reprieve or pardon, sir, or the 
like o' that." 

" Alas ! my poor girl," said the Duke, " you have made a long 
and a sad journey to very little purpose — Your sister is ordered for 
execution." 

" But I am given to understand that there is a law for reprieving 
her, if it is in the king's pleasure," said Jeanie. 

" Certainly there is," said the Duke ; " but that is purely in the 
king's breast. The crime has been but too common — the Scotch 
crown-lawyers think it is right there should be an example. Then the 
late disorders in Edinburgh have excited a prejudice in govern- 
ment against the nation at large, which they think can only be 
managed by measures of intimidation and severity. What argu- 
ment have you, my poor girl, except the warmth of your sisterly 
affection, to offer against all this? — What is your interest? — ■ 
What friends have you at court?" 

" None, excepting God and your Grace," said Jeanie, still keep- 
ing her ground resolutely. 

" Alas ! " said the Duke, " I could almost say with old Ormond, 
that there could not be any, whose influence was smaller with kings 
and ministers. It is a cruel part of our situation, young woman — 
I mean of the situation of men in my circumstances, that the 
public ascribe to them influence which they do not possess ; and. 



THE HEA-RT OF MID-LOTHIAN. 2t)t 

that individuals are led to expect from them assistance which we 
have no means of rendering. But candour and plain dealing is in 
the power of every one, and I must not let you imagine you have 
resources in my influence, which do not exist, to make your distress 
the heavier — I have no means of averting your sister's fate— She 
must die." 

" We must a' die, sir," said Jeanie ; "it is our common doom for 
our father's transgression ; but we shouldna hasten ilk other out o' 
the world, that's what your honour kens better than me." 

" My good young woman," said the Duke, mildly, " we are all 
apt to blame the law under which we immediately suffer ; but you 
seem to have been well educated in your line of life, and you must 
know that it is alike the law of God and man, that the murderer 
shall surely die." 

" But, sir, Eme— that is, my poor sister, sir— canna be proved to 
be a murderer ; and if she be not, and the law take her life not- 
withstanding, wha is it that is the murderer then ? " 

" I am no lawyer," said the Duke ; " and I own I think the sta- 
tute a very severe one." 

"You are a law-maker, sir, with your leave ; and, therefore, ye 
have power over the law," answered jeanie. 

" Not in my individual capacity," said the Duke ; " though, as 
one of a large body, I have a voice in the legislation. But that 
cannot serve you — nor have I at present, I care not who knows it, 
so much personal influence with the sovereign, as would entitle me 
to ask from him the most insignificant favour. What could tempt 
you, young woman, to address yourself to me ? " 

" It was yoursell, sir." 

"Myself?" he replied — "I am sure you have never seen me 
before." 

" No, sir ; but a' the world kens that the Duke of Argyle is his 
country's friend ; and that ye fight for the right, and speak for the 
right, and that there's nane like you in our present Israel, and so 
they that think themselves wranged draw to refuge under your 
shadow ; and if ye wanna stir to save the blood of an innocent 
country-woman of your ain, what should we expect frae southerns 
and strangers ? And maybe I had another reason for troubling 
your honour." 

" And what is that ? " asked the Duke. 

" I hae understood from my father, that your honour's house, and 
especially your gudesire and his father, laid down their lives on the 
scaffold in the persecuting time. And my father was honoured to 
gie his testimony baith in the cage and in the pillory, as is spe- 
cially mentioned in the books of Peter Walker the packman, that 
your honour, I dare say, kens, for he uses maist partly the west- 
land of Scotland. And, sir, there's ane that takes concern in me, 
that wished me to gang to your Grace's presence, for his gudesire 
had done your gracious gudesire some good tunij as ye will see frae 
these papers." 

With these words, she delivered to the Duke the little parcel 
which she had received from* Butler. He opened it, and, in the 

T 2 



2g2 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

envelope, read with some surprise, " ' Muster-roll of the men serv- 
ing in the troop of that godly gentleman, Captain Salathiel Bang- 
text. — Obadiah Muggleton, Sin-Despise, Double-knock, Stand- 
fast-in-faith Gipps, Turn-to-the-right Thwack-away '—What the 
deuce is this ? A list of Praise-God Barebones's Parliament I 
think, or of old Noll's evangelical army— that last fellow should 
understand his wheelings to judge by his name. — But what does 
all this mean, my girl ? " 

" It was the other paper, sir," said Jeanie, somewhat abashed at 
the mistake. 

" O, .this is my unfortunate grandfather's hand sure enough 
— ' To all who may have friendship for the house of Argyle, 
these are to certify, that Benjamin Butler, of Monk's regiment 
dragoons, of having been, under God, the means of saving my 
life from four English troopers who were about to slay me, I, 
having no other present means of recompense in my power, do 
give him this ackowledgment, hoping that it may be useful to 
him or his, during these troublesome times ; and do conjure my 
friends, tenants, kinsmen, and whoever will do aught for me, either 
in the Highlands or Lowlands, to protect and assist the said Ben- 
jamin Butler, and his friends or family, on their lawful occasions, 
giving them such countenance, maintenance, and supply, as may 
correspond with the benefit he hath bestowed on me ; witness 
my hand — ' LORNE.' 

" This is a strong injunction — This Benjamin Butler was your 
grandfather, I suppose ?— You seem too young to have been his 
daughter." 

" He was nae akin to me, sir — he was grandfather to ane — to a 
neighbour's son — to a sincere weel-wisher of mine, sir," dropping 
her little curtsey as she spoke. 

" O, I understand," said the Duke — " a true-love affair. He was 
the grandsire of one you are engaged to ? " 

"One 1 was engaged to, sir," said Jeanie, sighing; "but this 
unhappy business of my poor sister " 

" What ! " said the Duke, hastily, — " he has not deserted you on 
that account, has he ? " 

" No, sir ; he wad be the last to leave a friend in difficulties," 
said Jeanie ; " but I maun think for him, as weel as for mysell. 
He is a clergyman, sir, and it would not beseem him to marry the 
like of me, wi' this disgrace on my kindred." 

" You are a singular young woman," said the Duke. " You seem 
to me to think of every one before yourself. And have you really 
come up from Edinburgh on foot, to attempt this hopeless solicita- 
tion for your sister's life ? " 

" It was not a' thegether on foot, sir,'' answered Jeanie ; " for I 
sometimes got a cast in a waggon, and I had a horse from Ferry- 
bridge, and then the coach " 

" Well, never mind all that," interrupted the Duke. — " What reason 
have you for thinking your sister innocent ?" 

" Because she has not been proved guilty, as will appear from 
looking at these papers." 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 293 

She put into his hand a note of the evidence, and copies of her 
sister's declaration. These papers Butler had procured after her 
departure, and Saddletree had them forwarded to London, to Mrs. 
Glass's care, so that Jeanie found the documents, so necessary for 
supporting her suit, lying in readiness at her arrival. 

Sit down in that chair, my good girl," said the Duke, " until I 
glance over the papers." 

She obeyed, and watched .with the utmost anxiety each change 
in his countenance, as he cast his eye through the papers briefly, 
yet with attention, and making memoranda as he went along. 
After reading them hastily over, he looked up, and seemed about 
to speak, yet changed his purpose, as if afraid of committing him- 
self by giving too hasty an opinion, and read over again several 
passages which he had marked as being most important. All this 
he did in shorter time than can be supposed by men of ordinary 
talents ; for his mind was of that acute and penetrating character 
which discovers, with the glance of intuition, what facts bear on 
^ the particular point that chances to be subjected to consideration. 
* At length he rose, after a few minutes' deep reflection. — " Young 
woman," said he, " your sister's case must certainly be termed a 
hard one." 

" God bless you, sir, for that very word ! " said Jeanie. 

" It seems contrary to the genius of British law," continued the 
Duke, " to take that for granted which is not proved, or to punish 
with death for a crime, which, for aught the prosecutor has been 
able to show, may not have been committed at all." 

" God bless you, sir ! " again said Jeanie, who had risen from 
her seat, and, with clasped hands, eyes glittering through tears, and 
features which trembled with anxiety, drank in every word which 
the Duke uttered. 

" But, alas ! my poor girl," he continued, " what good will my 
opinion do you, unless I could impress it upon those in whose 
hands your sister's life is placed by the la"w ? Besides, I am no 
lawyer ; and I must speak with some of our Scottish gentlemen of 
the gown about the matter." 

" O but, sir, what seems reasonable to your honour, will certainly 
be the same to them," answered Jeanie. 

" I do not know that," replied the Duke ; " ilka man buckles his 
belt his ain gate— you know our old Scotch proverb ? — But you 
shall not have placed this reliance on me altogether in vain. 
Leave these papers with me, and you shall hear from me to-morrow 
or next day. Take care to be at home at Mrs. Glass's, and ready 
to come to me at a moment's warning. It will be unnecessary 
for you to give Mrs. Glass the trouble to attend you ;— and, by 
the by, you will please to be dressed just as you are at present." 

" I wad hae putten on a cap, sir," said Jeanie, " but your honour 
kens it isna the fashion of my country for single women ; and I 
judged that being sae mony hundred miles frae hame, your 
Grace's heart wad warm to the tartan," looking at the corner of 
her plaid. 

" You judged quite right," said the Duke. " I know the full 



294 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

value of the snood ; and MacCallummore's heart will be as cold 
as death can make it, when it does not warm to the tartan. Now, 
go away, and don't be out of the way when I send." 

Jeanie replied, — " There is little fear of that, sir, for I have little 
heart to go to see sights amang this wilderness of black houses. 
But if I might say to your gracious honour, that if ye ever con- 
descend to speak to ony ane that is of greater degree than yoursell, 
though maybe it isna civil in me to say sae, just if you would think 
there can be nae sic odds between you and them, as between 
poor Jeanie Deans from Saint Leonard's and the Duke of Argyle ; 
and so dinna be chappit back or cast doun wi' the first rough 
answer." 

" I am not apt," said the Duke, laughing, " to mind rough an- 
swers much — Do not you hope too much from what I have pro- 
mised. I will do my best, but God has the hearts of Kings in his 
own hand." 

Jeanie curtseyed reverently and' withdrew, attended by the Duke's 
gentleman, to her hackney-coach, with a respect which her appear- 
ance did not demand, but which was perhaps paid to the length of 
the interview with which his master had honoured her. 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 



Ascend, 

While radiant summer opens all its pride, 
Thy hill, delightful Shene ! Here let us sweep 
The boundless landscape. 

Thomson. 

From her kind and officious, but somewhat gossiping friend, 
Mrs. Glass, Jeanie underwent a very close catechism on their road 
to the Strand, where the Thistle of the good lady flourished in full 
glory, and, with its legend of Nemo me immune, distinguished a shop 
then well known to all Scottish folk of high and low degree. 

" And were you sure aye to say your Grace to him ? " said the 
good old lady ; " for ane should make a distinction between Mac- 
Callummore and the bits o' southern bodies that they ca' lords here 
— there are as mony o' them, Jeanie, as would gar ane think they 
maun cost but little fash in the makin — some of them I wadna trust 
wi' six pennies-worth of black rappee — some of them I wadna gie 
mysell the trouble to put up a hapnyworth in brown paper for — But 
I hope you showed your breeding to the Duke of Argyle, for what 
sort of folk would he think your friends in London, if you had been 
lording him, and him a Duke ? " 

" He didna seem muckle to mind," said Jeanie ; " he kend that I 
was landward bred." 

" Weel, weel," answered the good lady. " His Grace kens me 
weel ; so I am the less anxious about it. I never fill his snuff-box 
but he says, ' How H' ye do, good Mrs. Glass ! — How are all our 
friends in the North ? ' or it may be — ' Have ye heard from the 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 295 

North lately ? ' And you may be sure, I make my best curtsey, 
and answer, ' My Lord Duke, I hope your Grace's noble Duchess, 
and your Grace's young ladies, are well ; and I hope the snuff con- 
tinues to give your Grace satisfaction.' And then ye will see the 
people in the shop begin to look about them ; and if there's a 
Scotchman, as there may be three or half-a-dozen, aff go the hats, 
and mony a look after him, and ' there goes the Prince of Scotland, 
God bless him ! ' But ye have not told me yet the very words he 
said t' ye." 

Jeanie had no intention to be quite so communicative. She had, 
as the reader may have observed, some of the caution and shrewd- 
ness, as well as of the simplicity, of her country. She answered 
generally, that the Duke had received her very compassionately, 
and had promised to interest himself in her sister's affair, and to let 
her hear from him in the course of the next day, or the day after. 
She did not choose to make any mention of his having desired her 
to be in readiness to attend him, far less of his hint, that she should 
not bring he"r landlady. So that honest Mrs. Glass was obliged to 
remain satisfied with the general intelligence above mentioned, after 
having done all she could to extract more. 

It may easily be conceived, that, on the next day, Jeanie de- 
clined all invitations and inducements, whether of exercise or 
curiosity, to walk abroad, and continued to inhale the close, 'and 
somewhat professional atmosphere of Mrs. Glass's small parlour. 
The latter flavour it owed to a certain .cupboard, containing, among 
other articles, a few canisters of real Havannah, which, whether 
from respect to the manufacture, or out of a reverend fear of the 
exciseman, Mrs. Glass did not care to trust in the open shop below, 
and which communicated to the room a scent, that, however fra- 
grant to the nostrils of the connoisseur, was not very agreeable to 
those of Jeanie. 

" Dear sirs," she said to herself, " I wonder how my cousin's silk 
manty, and her gowd watch, or onything in the world, can be worth 
sitting sneezing all her life in this little stifling room, and might 
walk on green braes if she liked." 

Mrs. Glass was equally surprised at her cousin's reluctance to stir 
abroad, and her indifference to the' fine sights of London. " It 
would always help to pass away the time," she said, " to have some- 
thing to look at, though ane was in distress." But Jeanie was un- 
persuadable. 

The day after her interview with the' Duke was spent in that 
" hope delayed, which maketh the heart sick." Minutes glided after 
minutes — hours fled after hours — it became too late to have any 
reasonable expectation of hearing from the Duke that day ; yet the 
hope which ' she disowned, she could not altogether relinquish, 
and her heart throbbed, and her ears tingled, with every casual 
sound in the shop below. It was in vain. ' The day wore away in 
the anxiety of protracted and fruitless expectation. 

The next morning commenced in the same manner. But before 
noon, a well-dressed gentleman entered Mrs. Glass's shop, and re- 
quested to see a young woman from Scotland. 



2 g6 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" That will be my cousin, Jeanie Deans, Mr. Archibald," said 
Mrs. Glass, with a curtsey of recognizance. "Have you any message 
for her from his Grace the Duke of Argyle, Mr. Archibald ? I will 
carry it to her in a moment." 

" I believe I must give her the trouble of stepping down, Mrs. 
Glass." . 

" Jeanie— Jeanie Deans ! " said Mrs. Glass, screaming at the 
bottom of the little staircase, which ascended from the corner of 
the shop to the higher regions. " Jeanie— Jeanie Deans, I say ! 
come down stairs instantly ; here is the Duke of Argyle's groom of 
the chambers desires to see you directly." This was announced in 
a voice so loud, as to make all who chanced to be within hearing 
aware of the important communication. 

It may easily be supposed, that Jeanie did not tarry long in ad- 
justing herself to attend the summons, yet her feet almost failed her 
as she came down stairs. 

" I must ask the favour of your company a little way," said Archi- 
bald, with civility. 

"I am quite ready, sir,'' said Jeanie. 

" Is my cousin going out, Mr. Archibald ? then I will hae to go 
wi' her, no doubt. — James Rasper— Look to the shop, James. — Mr. 
Archibald," pushing a jar towards him, "you take his Grace's mix- 
ture, I think. Please to fill your box, for old acquaintance sake, 
while I get on my things." 

Mr. Archibald transferred a modest parcel of snuff from the jar 
to his own mull, but said he was obliged to decline the pleasure oj[ 
Mrs. Glass's company, as his message was particularly to the young 
person. 

" Particularly to the young person ? " said Mrs. Glass ; " is not 
that uncommon, Mr. Archibald ? But his Grace is the best judge ; 
and you are a steady person, Mr. Archibald. It is not every one 
that comes from a great man's house I would trust my cousin with. 
But, Jeanie, you must not go through the streets with Mr. Archi- 
bald with your tartan what-d'-ye-call-it there upon your shoulders, 
as if you had come up with a drove of Highland cattle. Wait till 
I bring down my silk cloak. Why we'll have the mob after 
you ! " 

" I have a hackney-coach in waiting, madam," said Mr. Archi- 
bald, interrupting the officious old lady, from whom Jeanie might 
otherwise have found it difficult to escape, " and, I believe, I must 
not allow her time for any change of dress." 

So saying, he hurried Jeanie into the coach, while she internally 
praised and wondered at the easy manner in which he shifted off 
Mrs. Glass's officious offers and inquiries, without mentioning his 
master's orders, or entering into any explanation. 

On entering the coach, Mr. Archibald seated himself in the front 
seat, opposite to our heroine, and they drove on in silence. After 
they had driven nearly half-an-hour, without a word on either side, 
it occurred to Jeanie, that the distance and time did not correspond 
with that which had been occupied by her journey on the former 
occasion, to and from the residence of the Duke of Argyle. At 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 297 

length she could not help asking her taciturn companion, " Whilk 
way they were going ? " 

" My Lord Duke will inform you himself, madam,'' answered 
Archibald, with the same solemn courtesy which marked his whole 
demeanour. Almost as he spoke, the hackney-coach drew up, and 
the coachman dismounted and opened the door. Archibald got 
out, and assisted Jeanie to get down. She found herself in a large 
turnpike road, without the bounds of London, upon the other side 
of which road was drawn up a plain chariot and four horses, the 
panels without arms, and the servants without liveries. 

" You have been punctual, I see, Jeanie," said the Duke of Argyle, 
as Archibald opened the carriage door. " You must be my com- 
panion for the rest of the way. Archibald will remain here with the 
hackney-coach till your return." 

Ere Jeanie could make answer, she found herself, to her no small 
astonishment, seated by the side of a Duke, in a carriage which 
rolled forward at a rapid yet smooth rate, very different in both par- 
ticulars from the lumbering, jolting vehicle which she had just left ; 
and which, lumbering and jolting as it was, conveyed to one who 
had seldom been in a coach before, a certain feeling of dignity and 
importance. 

" Young woman," said the Duke, " after thinking as attentively 
on your sister's case as is in my power, I continue to be impressed 
with the belief that great injustice may be done by the execution of 
her sentence. So are one or two liberal and intelligent lawyers of 
both countries whom I have spoken with. — Nay, pray hear me out 
before you thank me. — I have already told you my personal con- 
viction is of little consequence, unless I could impress the same 
upon others. Now I have done for you, what I would certainly not 
have done to serve any purpose of my own — I have asked an audi- 
ence, of a lady whose interest with the king is deservedly very high. 
It has been allowed me, and I am desirous that you should see her 
and speak for yourself. You have no occasion to be abashed ; tell 
your story simply as you did to me." 

" I am much obliged to your Grace," said Jeanie, remembering 
Mrs. Glass's charge, " and I am sure since I have had the courage 
to speak to your Grace, in poor EfEe's cause, I have less reason to 
be shame-faced in speaking to a leddy. But, sir, I would like to 
ken what to ca' her, whether your grace, or your honour, or your 
leddyship, as we say to lairds and leddies in Scotland, and I will 
take care to mind it ; for I ken leddies are full mair particular than 
gentlemen about their titles of honour." 

" You have no occasion to call her anything but Madam. Just 
say what you think is likely to make the best impression — look at 
me from time to time — if I put my hand to my cravat so, (showing 
her the motion,) you will stop ; but I shall only do this when you 
say anything that is not likely to please." 

" But, sir, your Grace," said Jeanie, " if it wasna ower muckle 
trouble, wad it no be better to tell me what I should say, and I 
could get it by heart ? " 

" No, Jeanie, that would not have the same effect, — that would be 



298 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

like reading a sermon, you know, which we good presbyterians think 
has less unction than when spoken without book," replied the Duke. 
" Just speak as plainly and boldly to this lady, as you did to me the 
day before yesterday ; and if you can gain her consent, I'll wad ye a 
plack, as we say in the north, that you get the pardon from the king." 

As he spoke, he took a pamphlet from his pocket, and began to 
read. Jeanie had good sense and tact, which constitute betwixt them 
that which is called natural good breeding. She interpreted the 
Duke's manoeuvre as a hint that she was to ask no more questions, 
and she remained silent accordingly. 

The carriage rolled rapidly onwards through fertile meadows, 
ornamented with splendid old oaks, and catching occasionally a 
glance of the majestic mirror of a broad and placid river. After 
passing through a pleasant village, the equipage stopped on a com- 
manding eminence, where the beauty of English landscape was 
displayed in its utmost luxuriance. Here the Duke alighted, and, 
desired Jeanie to follow him. They paused for a moment on the 
brow of a hill, to gaze on the unrivalled landscape which it pre- 
sented. A huge sea of verdure, with crossing and intersecting 
promontories of massive and tufted groves, was tenanted by num- 
berless flocks and herds, which seemed to wander unrestrained and 
unbounded through the rich pastures. The Thames, here turreted 
with villas, and there garlanded with forests, moved on slowly and 
placidly, like the mighty monarch of the scene, to whom all its other 
beauties were but accessories, and bore on its bosom an hundred 
barks and skiffs, whose white sails and gaily fluttering pennons gave 
life to the whole. 

The Duke of Argylewas, of course, familiar with this scene ; but 
to a man of taste it must be always new. Yet, as he paused and 
looked on this inimitable landscape, with the feeling of delight 
which it must give to the bosom of every admirer of nature, his 
thoughts naturally reverted to his own more grand, and scarce less 
beautiful, domains of Inveraray. — " This is a fine scene," he said 
to his companion, curious, perhaps, to draw out her sentiments ; 
" we have nothing like it in Scotland." 

" It's braw rich feeding for the cows, and they have a fine 
breed o' cattle here," replied' Jeanie ; " but I like just as weel to 
look at the craigs of Arthur's Seat, and the sea coming in ayont 
them, as at a' thae muckle trees." 

The Duke smiled at a reply equally professional and national, 
and made a signal for the carriage to remain where it was. Then 
adopting an unfrequented footpath, he conducted Jeanie, through 
several complicated mazes, to a postern door in a high brick wall. 
It was shut ; but as the Duke tapped slightly at it, a person in 
waiting within, after reconnoitering through a small iron-grate 
contrived for the purpose, unlocked the door and admitted them. 
They entered, and it was immediately closed and fastened behind 
them. This was all done quickly, the door so instantly, closing, 
and the person who opened it so suddenly disappearing, that Jeanie 
could not even catch a glimpse of his exterior. 

They found themselves at the extremity of a deep and narrow 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 299 

alley, carpeted with the most verdant and close-shaven turf, which 
felt like velvet under their feet, and screened from the sun by the 
branches of the lofty elms which united over the path, and caused 
it to resemble, in the solemn obscurity of the light which they 
admitted, as well as from the range of columnar stems, and intri- 
cate union of their arched branches, one of the narrow side aisles 
in an ancient Gothic cathedral. 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 



1 beseech you — 

These tears beseech you, and these chaste hands woo you, 
That never yet were heaved but to things holy — ■ 
Things like yourself — You are a God above us ; 
Be as a God, then, full of saving mercy ! 

The Bloody Brother. 

Encouraged as she was by the courteous manners of her noble 
countryman, it was not without a feeling of something like terror 
that Jeanie felt herself in a place apparently so lonely, with a man 
of such high rank. That she should have been permitted to wait 
on the Duke in his own house, and have been there received to a 
private interview, was in itself an uncommon and distinguished 
event in the annals of a life so simple as hers ; but to find herself 
his travelling companion in a journey, and then suddenly to be 
left alone with him in so secluded a situation, had something in it 
of awful mystery. A romantic herointe might have suspected and 
dreaded the power of her own charms ; but Jeanie was too wise to 
let such a silly thought intrude on her mind. Still, however, she 
had a most eager desire to know where she now was, and to whom 
she was to be presented. 

She remarked that the Duke's dress, though still such as indi- 
cated rank and fashion, (for it was not the custom of men of 
quality at that time to dress themselves like their own coachmen 
or grooms,) was nevertheless plainer than that in which she had 
seen him upon a former occasion, and was divested, in particular, 
of all those badges of external decoration which intimated superior 
consequence. In short, he was attired as plainly as any gentle- 
man of fashion could appear in the streets of London in a morning ; 
and this circumstance helped to shake an opinion which Jeanie 
began to entertain, that, perhaps, he intended she should plead her 
cause in the presence of royalty itself. " But, surely," she said to 
herself, " he wad hae putten on his braw star and garter, an he 
had thought o' coming before the face of Majesty — and after a.', 
this is mair like a gentleman's policy than a royal palace." 

There was some sense in Jeanie's reasoning ; yet she was not 
sufficiently mistress either of the circumstances of etiquette, or the 
particular relations which existed betwixt the government and the 
Duke of Argyle, to form an accurate judgment. The Duke, as we 
have said, was at this time in open opposition to the administra- 



300 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

tion of Sir Robert Walpole, and was understood to be out of favour 
with the royal family, to whom he had rendered such important 
services. But it was a maxim of Queen Caroline, to bear herself 
towards her political friends with such caution, as if there was a 
possibility of their one day being her enemies, and towards poli- 
tical opponents with the same degree of circumspection, as if they 
might again become friendly to her measures. Since Margaret of 
Anjou, no queen-consort had exercised such weight in the political 
affairs of England, and the personal address which she displayed 
on many occasions, had no small share in reclaiming from their 
political heresy, many of those determined Tories, who, after the 
reign of the Stewarts had been extinguished in the person of Queen 
Anne, were disposed rather to transfer their allegiance to her 
brother the Chevalier de St. George, than to acquiesce in the settle- 
ment of the crown on the Hanover family. Her husband, whose 
most shining quality was courage in the field of battle, and who 
endured the office of King of England, without ever being able to 
acquire English habits, or any familiarity with English disposi- 
tions, found the utmost assistance from the address of his partner, 
and while he jealously affected to do everything according to his 
own will and pleasure, was in secret prudent enough to take and 
follow the advice of his more adroit consort. He intrusted to her 
the delicate office of determining the various degrees of favour 
necessary to attach the wavering, or to confirm such as were 
already friendly, or to regain those whose good-will had been lost. 

With all the winning address of an elegant, and, according to 
the times, an accomplished woman, Queen Caroline possessed the 
masculine soul of the other sex. She was proud by nature, and 
even her policy could not always temper her expressions of dis- 
pleasure, although few were more ready at repairing any false step 
of this kind, when her prudence came up to the aid of her passions. 
She loved the real possession of power, rather than the show of it, 
and whatever she did herself that was either wise or popular, she 
always desired that the king should have the full credit as well as 
the advantage of the measure, conscious that, by adding to his 
respectability, she was most likely to maintain her own. And so 
desirous was she to comply with all his tastes, that, when threat- 
ened with the gout, she had repeatedly had recourse to checking 
the fit, by the use of the cold bath, thereby endangering her life, 
that she might be able to attend the king in his walks. 

It was a very consistent part of Queen Caroline's character, to 
keep up many private correspondences with those to whom in 
public she seemed unfavourable, or who, for various reasons, stood 
ill with the court. By this means she kept in her hands the' 
thread of many a political intrigue, and, without pledging herself to 
any thing, could often prevent discontent from becoming hatred, 
and opposition from exaggerating itself into rebellion. If by any 
accident her correspondence with such persons chanced to be 
observed or discovered, which she took all possible pains to 
prevent, it was represented as a mere intercourse of society, having 
no reference to politics ; an answer with which even the prime 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 301 

minister, Sir Robert Walpole, was compelled to remain satisfied, 
when he discovered that the Queen had given a private audience' 
to Pulteney, afterwards Earl of Bath, his most formidable and most 
inveterate enemy. 

In thus maintaining occasional intercourse with several persons- 
who seemed most alienated from the crown, it may readily be sup- 
posed, that Queen Caroline had taken care not to break entirely 
with the Duke of Argyle. His high birth, his great talents, the 
estimation in which he was held in his own country, the great 
services which he had rendered the house of Brunswick in 1715, 
placed him high in that rank of persons who were not to be rashly 
neglected. He had, almost by his single and unassisted talents, 
stopped the irruption of the banded force of all the Highland chiefs ; 
there was little doubt, that, with the slightest encouragement, he 
could put them all in motion, and renew the civil war ; and it was 
well known that the most flattering overtures had been transmitted 
to the Duke from the court of St. Germains. The character and 
temper of Scotland was still little known, and it was considered as 
a volcano, which might, indeed, slumber for a series of years, but 
was still liable, at a moment the least expected, to break out into a 
wasteful eruption. It was, therefore, of the highest importance to 
retain some hold over so important a personage as the Duke of 
Argyle, and Caroline preserved the power of doing so by means of 
a lady, with whom, as wife of George II., she might have been 
supposed to be on less intimate terms. 

It was not the least instance of the Queen's address, that she 
had contrived that one of her principal attendants, Lady Suffolk, 
should unite in her own person the two apparently inconsistent 
characters, of her husband's mistress, and her own very obsequious 
and complaisant confidant. By this dexterous management the 
Queen secured her power against the danger which might most 
have threatened it — the thwarting influence of an ambitious rival ; 
and if she submitted to the mortification of being obliged to con- 
nive at her husband's infidelity, she was at least guarded against 
what she might think its most dangerous effects, and was besides 
at liberty, now and then, to bestow a few civil insults upon " her 
good Howard," whom, however, in general, she treated with great 
decorum.* Lady Suffolk lay under strong obligations to the Duke 
of Argyle, for reasons which may be collected from Horace Wal- 
pole's Reminiscences of that reign, and through her means the 
Duke had some occasional correspondence with Queen Caroline, 
much interrupted, however, since the part he had taken in the 
debate concerning the Porteous mob, an affair which the Queen, 
though somewhat unreasonably, was disposed to resent, rather as 
an intended and premeditated insolence to her own person and 
authority, than as a sudden ebullition of popular vengeance. Still, 
however, the communication remained open betwixt them, though 
it had been of late disused on both sides. These remarks will be 
found necessary to understand the scene which is about to be pre- 
sented to the reader. 
From the narrow alley which they had traversed, the Duke 



302 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

turned into one of the same character, but broader and still longer. 
Here, for the first time since they had entered these gardens, 
Jeanie saw persons approaching them. 

They were two ladies ; one of whom walked a little behind the 
other, yet not so much as to prevent her from hearing and replying 
to whatever observation was addressed to her by the lady who 
walked foremost, and that without her having the trouble to turn 
her person. As they advanced very slowly, Jeanie had time to 
study their features and appearance. The Duke also slackened 
his pace, as if to give her time to collect herself, and repeatedly 
desired her not to be afraid. The lady who seemed the principal 
person had remarkably good features, though somewhat injured by 
the small-pox, that venomous scourge which each village Escula- 
pius (thanks to Jenner) can now tame as easily as their tutelary 
deity subdued the Python. The lady's eyes were brilliant, her 
teeth x good, and her countenance formed to express at will either 
majesty or courtesy. Her form, though rather embonpoint, was 
nevertheless graceful ; and the elasticity and firmness of her step 
gave no room to suspect, what was actually the case, that she 
suffered occasionally from a disorder the most unfavourable to 
pedestrian exercise. Her dress was rather rich than gay, and her 
manner commanding and noble. 

Her companion was of lower stature, with light brown hair and 
expressive blue eyes. Her features, without being absolutely 
regular, were perhaps more pleasing than if they had been criti- 
cally handsome. A melancholy, or at least a pensive expression, 
for which her lot gave too much cause, predominated when she 
was silent, but gave way to a pleasing and good-humoured smile 
when she spoke to any one. 

When they were within twelve or fifteen yards of these ladies, 
the Duke made a sign that Jeanie should stand still, and stepping 
forward himself, with the grace which was natural to him, made a 
profound obeisance, which was formally, yet in a dignified manner, 
returned by the personage whom he approached. 

" I hope," she said, with an affable and condescending smile, 
" that I see so great a stranger at court, as the Duke of Argyle has 
been of late, in as good health as his friends there and elsewhere 
could wish him to enjoy." 

The Duke replied, " That he had been perfectly well ; " and 
added, "that the necessity »of attending to the public business 
before the House, as well as the time occupied by a late journey to 
Scotland, had rendered him less assiduous in paying his duty at 
the levee and drawing-room than he could have desired." 
' " When your Grace can find time for a duty so frivolous," replied 
the Queen, " you are aware of your title to be well received. I 
hope my readiness to comply with the wish which you expressed 
yesterday to Lady Suffolk, is a sufficient proof that one of the 
royal family, at least, has not forgotten ancient and important 
services, in resenting something which resembles recent neglect." 
This was said apparently with great good humour, and in a tone 
which expressed a desire of conciliation. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 303 

The Duke replied, " That he would account himself the most 
unfortunate of men, if he could be supposed capable of neglecting 
his duty, in modes and circumstances when it was expected, and 
would have been agreeable. He was deeply gratified by the 
honour which her Majesty was now doing to him personally ; and 
he trusted she would soon perceive that it was in a matter essential 
to his Majesty's interest, that he had the boldness to give her this 
trouble." 

" You cannot oblige me more, my Lord Duke," replied the 
Queen, " than by giving me the advantage of your lights and 
experience on any point of the King's service. Your Grace is 
aware, that I can only be the medium through which the matter is 
subjected to his Majesty's superior wisdom ; but if it is a suit 
which respects your Grace personally, it shall lose no support by 
being preferred through me." 

" It is no suit of mine, madam," replied the Duke ; " nor have I 
any to prefer for myself personally, although I feel in full force my 
obligation to your Majesty. It is a business which concerns his 
Majesty, as a lover of justice and mercy, and which, I am con- 
vinced, may be highly useful in conciliating the unfortunate irrita- 
tion which at present subsists among his Majesty's good subjects 
in Scotland." 

There were two parts of this speech disagreeable to Caroline. 
In the first place, it removed the flattering notion she had adopted, 
that Argyle designed to use her personal intercession in making 
his peace with the administration, and recovering the employments 
of which he had been deprived ; and next, she was displeased that 
he should talk of the discontents in Scotland as irritations to be 
conciliated, rather than suppressed. 

Under the influence of these feelings, she answered hastily, " That 
his Majesty has good subjects in England, my Lord Duke, he is 
bovuid to thank God and the laws — that he has subjects in Scot- 
land, I think he may thank God and his sword." 

The Duke, though a courtier, coloured slightly, and the Queen, 
instantly sensible of her error, added, without displaying the least 
change of countenance, and as if the words had been an original 
branch of the sentence — " And the swords of those real Scotch- 
men who are friends to the House of Brunswick, particularly that 
of his Grace of Argyle." 

"My sword, madam," replied the Duke, "like that of my fathers, 
has been always at the command of my lawful king, and of my 
native country — I trust it is impossible to separate their real rights 
and interests. But the present is a matter of more private con- 
cern, and respects the person of an obscure individual." 

" What is the affair, my Lord ? " said the Queen. " Let us find 
out what we are talking about, lest we should misconstrue and 
misunderstand each other." 

" The matter, madam," answered the Duke of Argyle, " regards 
the fate of an unfortunate young woman in Scotland, now lying 
under sentence of death, for a crime of which I think it highly 
probable that she is innocent. And my humble petition to your 



504 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

Majesty is, to obtain your powerful intercession with the King for 
a pardon." 

It was now the Queen's turn to colour, and she did so over 
cheek and brow — neck and bosom. She paused a moment, as if 
unwilling to trust her voice with the first expression of her dis- 
pleasure ; and on assuming an air of dignity and an austere regard 
of control, she at length replied, " My Lord Duke, I will not ask 
your motives for addressing to me a request, which circumstances 
have rendered such an extraordinary one. Your road to the King's 
closet, as a peer and a privy-councillor, entitled to request an 
audience, was open, without giving me the pain of this discussion. 
/, at least have had enough of Scotch pardons." 

The Duke was prepared for this burst of indignation, and he 
was not shaken by it. He did not attempt a reply while the 
Queen was in the first heat of displeasure, but remained in the 
same firm, yet respectful posture, which he had assumed during 
the interview. The Queen, trained from her situation to self- 
command, instantly perceived the advantage she might give 
against herself by yielding to passion ; and added, in the same 
condescending and affable tone in which she had opened the inter- 
view, " You must allow me some of the privileges of the sex, my 
Lord ; and do not judge uncharitably of me, though I am a little 
moved at the recollection of the gross insult and outrage done in 
your capital city to the royal authority, at the very time when it 
was vested in my unworthy person. Your Grace cannot be surprised 
that I should both have felt it at the time, and recollected it now." 

" It is certainly a matter not speedily to be forgotten," answered 
the Duke. " My own poor thoughts of it have been long before 
your Majesty, and I must have expressed myself very ill if T did 
not convey my detestation of the murder which was committed 
under such extraordinary circumstances. I might, indeed, be so 
unfortunate as to differ with his Majesty's advisers on the degree 
in which it was either just or politic to punish the innocent instead 
of the guilty. But I trust your Majesty will permit me to be silent 
on a topic in which my sentiments have not the good fortune to 
coincide with those of more able men." 

" We will not prosecute a topic on which we may probably 
differ," said the Queen. " One word, however, I may say in 
private — You know our good lady Suffolk is a little deaf — the Duke 
of Argyle, when disposed to renew his acquaintance with his 
master and mistress, will hardly find many topics on which we should 
disagree." 

" Let me hope," said the Duke, bowing profoundly to so flatter- 
ing an intimation, " that I shall not be so unfortunate as to have 
found one on the present occasion." 

" I must first impose on your Grace the duty of confession," 
said the Queen, "before I grant you absolution. What is your 
particular interest in the young woman ? She does not seem " 
(and she scanned Jeanie, as she said this, with the eye) of a con- 
noisseur) " much qualified to alarm my friend the Duchess's 
jealousy." 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 303 

" I think your Majesty," replied the Duke, smiling in his turn, 
" will allow my taste may be a pledge for me on that score." 

" Then, though she has not much the air d'une grande dame, 
I suppose she is some thirtieth cousin in the terrible chapter of 
Scottish genealogy ? " 

" No, madam," said the Duke ; " but I wish some of my nearer 
relations had half her worth, honesty, and affection." 

" Her name must be Campbell, at least ? " said Queen Caroline. 

" No, madam ; her name is not quite so distinguished, if I may 
be permitted to say so," answered the Duke. 

" Ah ! but she comes from Inveraray or Argyleshire ? " said the 
Sovereign. 

" She has never been farther north in her life than Edinburgh, 
madam." 

" Then my conjectures are all ended," said the Queen, " and 
your Grace must yourself take the trouble to explain the affair of 
your protegee." 

With that precision and easy brevity which is only acquired by 
habitually conversing in the higher ranks of society, and which is 
the diametrical opposite of that protracted style of disquisition, 

" Which squires call potter, and which men call prose," 

the Duke explained the singular law under which Effie Deans 
had received sentence of death, and detailed the affectionate exer- 
tions which Jeanie had made in behalf of a sister, for whose sake 
she was willing to sacrifice all but truth and conscience. 

Queen Caroline listened with attention ; she was rather fond, it 
must be remembered, of an argument, and soon found matter in 
what the Duke told her for raising difficulties to his request. 

" It appears to me, my Lord," she replied, " that this is a severe 
law. But still it is adopted upon good grounds, I am bound to 
suppose, as the law of the country, and the girl has been convicted 
under it. The very presumptions which the law construes into a 
positive proof of guilt exist in her case ; and all that your Grace 
has said concerning the possibility of her innocence may be a very 
good argument for annulling the Act of Parliament, but cannot, 
while it stands good, be admitted in favour of any individual con- 
victed upon the statute." 

The Duke saw and avoided the snare, for he was conscious, 
that, by replying to the argument, he must have been inevitably 
led to a discussion, in the course of which the Queen was likely to 
be hardened in her own opinion, until she became obliged, out of 
mere respect to consistency, to let the criminal suffer. " If your 
Majesty," he said, " would condescend to hear my poor country- 
woman herself, perhaps she may find an advocate in your own 
heart, more able than I am, to combat the doubts suggested by 
your understanding." 

The Queen seemed to acquiesce, and the Duke made a signal for 
Jeanie to advance from the spot where she had hitherto remained 
watching countenances, which were too long accustomed to sup- 
press all apparent signs of emotion, to convey to her any interest- 

v 



306 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

ing intelligence. Her Majesty could not help smiling at the 
awestruck manner in which the quiet demure figure of the little 
Scotchwoman advanced towards her, and yet more at the first 
sound of her broad northern accent. But Jeanie had a voice low 
and sweetly toned, an admirable thing in woman, and eke besought 
" her Leddyship to have pity on a poor misguided young creature," 
in tones so affecting, that, like the notes of some of her native 
songs, provincial vulgarity was lost in pathos. 

" Stand up, young woman," said the Queen, but in a kind tone,. 
" and tell me what sort of a barbarous people your countryfolk are, 
where child-murder has become so common as to require the 
restraint of laws like yours ? " 

" If your Leddyship pleases," answered Jeanie, " there are mony 
places besides Scotland where mothers are unkind to their ain flesh 
and blood." 

It must be observed, that the disputes between George the 
Second, and Frederick, Prince of Wales, were then at the highest, 
and that the good-natured part of the public laid the blame on the 
Queen. She coloured highly, and darted a glance of a most pene- 
trating character first at Jeanie, and then at the Duke. Both 
sustained it unmoved ; Jeanie from total unconsciousness of the 
offence she had given, and the Duke from his habitual composure. 
But in his heart he thought, My unlucky protegee has with this 
luckless answer, shot dead, by a kind of chance-medley, her only 
hope of success. 

Lady Suffolk, good-humouredly and skilfully, interposed in this 
"awkward crisis. " You should tell this lady," she said to Jeanie, 
" the particular causes which render this crime common in your 
country." 

, " Some thinks it's the Kirk-Session — that is — it's the — it's the 
cutty-stool, if your Leddyship pleases," said Jeanie, looking down, 
and curtseying. 

" The what ? " said Lady Suffolk, to whom the phrase was new, . 
and who besides was rather deaf. 

" That's the stool of repentance, madam, if it please your 
Leddyship," answered Jeanie, " for light life and conversation, and 
for breaking the seventh command:" Here she raised her eyes to 
the Duke, saw his hand at his chin, and, totally unconscious of 
what she had said out of joint, gave double effect to the innuendo, 
by stopping short and looking embarrassed. 

As for Lady Suffolk, she retired like a covering party which, 
having interposed betwixt their retreating friends and the enemy, 
have suddenly drawn on themselves a fire unexpectedly severe. 

The deuce take the lass, thought the Duke of Argyle to himself ; 
there goes another shot — and she has hit with both barrels right 
and left ! 

Indeed the Duke had himself his share of the confusion, for, 
having acted as master of ceremonies to this innocent offender, 
he felt much in the circumstances of a country squire, who, having 
introduced his spaniel into a well-appointed drawing-room, is 
doomed to witness the disorder and damage which arises to china 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN, 307 

and to dress-gowns,. in consequence of its untimely frolics. Jeanie's 
last chance-hit, however, obliterated the ill impression which had 
arisen from the first ; for her Majesty had not so lost the feelings 
of a wife in those of a Queen, but that she could enjoy a jest at 
the expense of " her good Suffolk." She turned towards the Duke 
of Argyle, with a smile, which marked that she enjoyed the triumph, 
and observed, "the Scotch are a rigidly moral people." Then 
again applying herself to Jeanie, she asked, how she travelled up 
from Scotland. 

" Upon my foot mostly, madam," was the reply. 

" What, all that immense way upon foot ? How far can you 
walk in a day ? " 

" Five-and-twenty miles and a bittock." 

" And a what ? " said the Queen, looking towards the Duke of 
Argyle. 

" And about five miles more," replied the Duke. 

" I thought I was a good walker," said the Queen, " but this 
shames me sadly." 

" May your Leddyship never hae sae weary a heart, that ye canna 
be sensible of the weariness of the limbs," said Jeanie. 

That came better off, thought the Duke ; it's the first thing she 
has said to the purpose. 

"And I didna justa'thegither walk the hail way neither, foi»I had 
whiles the cast of a cart ; and I had the cast of a horse from Ferry- 
bridge—and divers other easements," said Jeanie, cutting short her 
story, for she observed the Duke make the sign he had fixed upon. 

"With all these accommodations," answered the Queen, "you 
must have had a very fatiguing journey, and, I fear, to little pur- 
pose ; since, if the King were to pardon your sister, in all proba- 
bility it would do her little good, for I suppose your people of Edin- 
burgh would hang her out of spite." 

She will sink herself now outright, thought the Duke. 

But he was wrong. The shoals on which Jeanie had touched m 
this delicate conversation lay under ground, and were unknown to- 
iler ; this rock was above water, and she avoided it. 

" She was confident," she said, " that baith toun and country wad- 
rejoice to see his Majesty taking compassion on a poor unfriended. 
creature." 

" His Majesty has not found it so in a late instance," said the- 
Queen ;."but I suppose, my Lord Duke would advise him to be- 
guided by the votes of the rabble themselves, who should be hanged 
and who spared ? " 

" No, madam," said the Duke ; " but I would advise his Majesty 
to be guided by his own feelings, and those of his royal consort j 
and then, I am sure, punishment will only attach itself to guilt, and 
even then with cautious reluctance." 

" Well, my Lord," said her Majesty, " all these fine speeches do 
not convince me of the propriety of. so soon showing any mark of 
favour to your — I suppose I must not say rebellious ? — but, at least, 
your very disaffected and intractable metropolis. Why, the whole 
nation is in a league to screen the savage and abominable mur- 

u 2 



3 o8 , THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

derfirs of that unhappy man ; otherwise, how is it possible but that, 
of so many perpetrators, and engaged in so public an action for 
such a length of time, one at least must have been recognized ? 
Even this wench, for aught I can tell, may be a depository of the 
secret. — Hark you, young woman, had you any friends engaged in 
the Porteous mob ? " 

" No, madam," answered Jeanie, happy that the question was so 
framed that she could, with a good conscience, answer it in the 
negative. , 

" But I suppose," continued the Queen, " if you were possessed 
of such a secret, you would hold it a matter of conscience to keep 
it to yourself? " 

" I would pray to be directed and guided what was the line of 
duty, madam," answered Jeanie. 

" Yes, and take that which suited your own inclinations,'' replied 
her Majesty. 

" If it like you, madam,'' said Jeanie, " I would hae gaen to the 
end of the earth to save the life of John Porteous, or any other un- 
happy man in his condition ; but I might lawfully doubt how far I 
am called upon to be the avenger of his blood, though it may be- 
come the civil magistrate to do so. He is dead and gane to his 
place, and they that have slain him must answer for their ain act. 
But my sister — my puir sister Effie, still lives, though her days and 
hours are numbered ! — She still lives, and a word of the King's 
mouth might restore her to a broken-hearted auld man, that ! never, 
in his daily and nightly exercise, forgot to pray that his Majesty, 
might be blessed with a long and a prosperous reign, and that his 
throne, and the throne of his posterity, might be established in 
righteousness. O, madam, if ever ye keri'd what it was to sorrow 
for and with a sinning and a suffering creature, whose mind is sae 
tossed that she can be neither ca'd fit to live or die, have some com- 
passion on our misery ! — Save an honest house from dishonour, 
and an unhappy girl, not eighteen years of age, from an early and 
dreadful death ! Alas ! it is not when we sleep soft and wake 
merrily ourselves that we think on other people's sufferings. Our 
hearts are waxed light within us then, and we are for righting our 
ain wrangs and fighting our ain battles. But when the hour ,of 
trouble comes to the mind or to the body — and seldom may it visit 
your Leddyship — and when the hour of death comes, that comes to 
high and low — lang and late may it be yours ! — Oh, my Leddy, then 
it isna what we hae dune for oursells, but what we hae dune for 
others, that we think on maist pleasantly. And the thoughts that 
ye hae intervened to spare the puir thing's life will be sweeter in 
that hour, come when it may, than if a word of your mouth could 
hang the haill Porteous mob at the tail of ae tow." 

Tear followed tear down Jeanie's cheeks, as, her features glowing 
and quivering with emotion, she pleaded her sister's cause with 
a pathos which was at once simple and solemn. 

" This is eloquence," said her Majesty to the Duke of Argyle. 
"Young woman," she continued, addressing herself to Jeanie, "/ 
cannot grant a pardon to your sister — but you shall not want my 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 309 

warm intercession with his Majesty. Take this housewife case,'' 
she continued, putting a small embroidered needle-case into Jeanie's 
hands ; " do not open it now, but at your leisure you will find 
something in it which will remind you that you have had an inter- 
view with Queen Caroline." 

Jeanie, having her suspicions thus confirmed, dropped on her 
knees, and would have expanded herself in gratitude ; but the 
Duke, who was upon thorns lest she should say more or less than 
just enough, touched his chin once more. 

" Our business is, I think, ended for the present, my Lord Duke," 
said the Queen, "and, I trust, to your satisfaction. Hereafter I 
hope to see your Grace more frequently, both at Richmond and 
St. James's. — Come, Lady Suffolk, we must wish his Grace good- 
morning." 

They exchanged their parting reverences, and the Duke, so soon 
as the ladies had turned their backs, assisted Jeanie to rise from 
the ground, and conducted her back through the avenue, which she 
trode with the feeling of one who walks in her sleep. 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 



So soon as I can win the offended King, 
I will be known your advocate. 

Cymbeline. 

The Duke of Argyle led the way in silence to the small postern 
by which they had been admitted into Richmond Park, so long the 
favourite residence of Queen Caroline. It was opened by the same 
half-seen janitor, and they found themselves beyond the precincts 
of the royal demesne. Still not a word was spoken on either side. 
The Duke probably wished to allow his rustic protegee time to re- 
cruit her faculties, dazzled and sunk with colloquy sublime ; and 
betwixt what she had guessed, had heard, and had seen, Jeanie 
Deans's mind was too much agitated to permit her to ask any 
questions. 

They found the carriage of the Duke in the place where they had 
left it ; and when they resumed their places, soon began to advance 
rapidly on their return to town. 

" I think, J eanie," said the Duke, breaking silence, " you have 
every reason to congratulate yourself on the issue of your interview 
with her Majesty." 

"And that leddy was the Queen hersell ?" said Jeanie; " I mis- 
doubted it when I saw that your honour didna put on your hat — 
And yet I can hardly believe it, even when I heard her speak it 
hersell." 

" It was certainly Queen Caroline," replied the Duke. " Have- 
you no curiosity to see what is in the little pocket-book ? " 

" Do you think the pardon will be in it, sir ? " said Jeanie, with 
the eager animation of hope. 



3IO THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" Why, no," replied the Duke ; " that is unlikely. They seldom 
carry these things about them, unless they were likely to be wanted ; 
and, besides, her Majesty told you it was the King, not she, who 
was to grant it." 

" That is true too," said Jeanie ; " but I am so confused in my 
mind — But does your honour think there is a certainty of Erne's 
pardon then ? " continued she, still holding in her hand the un- 
opened pocket-book. 

" Why, kings are kittle cattle to shoe behind, as we say in the 
north," replied the Duke ; " but his wife knows his trim, and I have 
not the least doubt that the matter' is quite certain." 

" O God be praised ! God be praised ! " ejaculated Jeanie ; " and 
may the gude leddy never want the heart's ease she has gien me at 
this moment ! — And God bless you too, my Lord ! without your 
help I wad ne'er hae won near her." 

The Duke let her dwell upon this subject for a considerable time, 
curious, perhaps, to see how long the feelings of gratitude would 
continue to supersede those of curiosity. But so feeble was. the 
latter feeling in Jeanie's mind, that his Grace, with whom, perhaps, 
it was for the time a little stronger, was obliged once more to bring 
forward the subject of the Queen's present. It was opened ac- 
cordingly. In the inside of the case were the usual assortment of 
silk and needles, with scissors, tweezers, &c. ; and in the pocket 
was a bank-bill for fifty pounds. 

The Duke had no sooner informed Jeanie of the value of this 
last document, for she was unaccustomed to see notes for such 
sums, than she expressed her regret at the mistake which had taken 
place. " For the hussy itsell," she said, "was a very valuable thing 
for a keepsake, with the Queen's name written in the inside with 
her ain hand doubtless — Caroline — as plain as could be, and 
a crown drawn aboon it." 

She therefore tendered the bill to the Duke, requesting him to 
find some mode of returning it to the royal owner. 
; "No, no, Jeanie," said the Duke, " there is no mistake in the 
case. Her Majesty knows you have been put to great expense, and 
she wishes to make it up to you." 

" I am sure she is even ower gude," said Jeanie, " and it glads me 
muckle that I can pay back Dumbiedikes his siller, without dis- 
tressing my father; honest man." 

" Dumbiedikes ? What, a freeholder of Mid- Lothian, is he not ? " 
said his Grace, whose occasional residence in that county made him 
acquainted with most of the heritors, as landed persons are termed 
in Scotland — " He has a house not far from Dalkeith, wears a black 
wig and a laced hat ? " 

" Yes,'Sir," answered Jeanie, who had her reasons for being brief 
in her answers upon this topic. 

" Ah, my old friend Dumbie ! " said the Duke ; " I have thrice 
seen him fou, and only once heard the sound of his voice — Is he 
a cousin of yours, Jeanie ? " 

" No, sir, my Lord." 

" Then he must be a well-wisher, I suspect ? " 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 311 

"Ye — yes, — my Lord, sir," answered Jeanie, blushing, and with 
hesitation. 

"Aha ! then, if the Laird starts, I suppose my friend Butler must 
be in some danger ? " 

" Ono, sir," answered Jeanie much more readily, but at the same 
time blushing much more deeply. 

"Well, Jeanie," said the Duke, "you are a girl may be safely 
trusted with your own matters, and I shall inquire no farther about 
them. But as to this same pardon, I must see to get it passed 
through the proper forms ; and I have a friend in office who will, 
for auld lang syne, do me so much favour. And then, Jeanie, as I 
•shall have occasion to send an express down to Scotland, who will 
travel with it safer and more swiftly than you can do, I will take 
care to have it put into the proper channel ; meanwhile, you may 
write to your friends, by post, of your good success." 

" And does your Honour think," said Jeanie, " that will do as 
weel as if I were to take my tap in my lap, and slip my ways hame 
again on my ain errand ? " 

" Much better, certainly," said the Duke. " You know the roads 
are not very safe for a single woman to travel." 

Jeanie internally acquiesced in this observation. 

"And I have a plan for you besides. One of the Duchess's 
attendants, and one of mine — your acquaintance Archibald — are 
going down to Inveraray in a light calash, with four horses I have 
•bought, and there is room enough in the carriage for you to go with 
them as far as Glasgow, where Archibald will find means of sending 
you safely to Edinburgh — And in the way, I beg you will teach the 
woman as much as you can of the mystery of cheese-making, for 
she is to have a charge in the dairy, and I dare swear you are as 
,tidy about your milk-pail as about your dress." 

"Does your honour like cheese?" said Jeanie, with a gleam of 
■ conscious delight as she asked the question. 

" Like it ? " said the Duke, whose good-nature anticipated what 
was to follow, — " cakes and cheese are a dinner for an emperor, let 
alone a Highlandman." 

" Because," said Jeanie, with modest confidence, and great and 
evident self-gratulation, " we have been thought so particular in 
making cheese, that some folk think it as gude as the real Dunlop ; 
and if your Honour's Grace wad but accept a stane or twa, blithe, 
and fain, and proud it wad make us ! But maybe ye may like the 
ewe-milk, that is, the Buckholmside* cheese better ; or maybe the 
; gait-milk, as ye come frae the Highlands — and I canna pretend 
just to the same skeel o' them ; but my cousin Jean, that lives at 
Lochermachus in Lammermuir, I could speak to her, and " 

" Quite unnecessary," said the Duke ; " the Dunlop is the very 
cheese of which I am so fond, and I will take , it as the greatest 
favour you can do me to send one to Caroline Park. But remember, 
be on honour with it, Jeanie, and make it all yourself, for I am a 
real good judge." i 

" I am not feared," said Jeanie, confidently, " that I may please 
your Honour : for I am sure you look as if you could hardly find 



3 i2 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

fault wi' ony body that did their best ; and weel is it my part, I 
trow, to do mine." 

This discourse introduced a topic upon which the two travellers, 
though so different in rank and education, found each a good deal 
to say. The Duke, besides his other patriotic qualities, was a dis- 
tinguished agriculturist, and proud of his knowledge in that depart- 
ment. He entertained Jeanie with his observations on the different 
breeds of cattle in Scotland, and their capacity for the dairy, and 
received so much information from her practical experience in re- 
turn, that he promised her a couple of Devonshire cows in reward 
for the lesson. In short, his mind was so transported back to his. 
rural employments and amusements, that he sighed when his car- 
riage stopped opposite to the old hackney-coach, which Archibald 
had kept in attendance at the place where they had left it. While 
the coachman again bridled his lean cattle, which had been in- 
dulged with a bite of musty hay, the Duke cautioned Jeanie not to 
be too communicative to her landlady concerning what had passed. 
" There is," he said " no use of speaking of matters till they are- 
actually settled ; and you may refer the good lady to Archibald, if 
she presses you hard with questions. She is his old acquaintance^ 
and he knows how to manage with her." 

He then took a cordial farewell of Jeanie, and told her to be 
ready in the ensuing week to return to Scotland — saw her safely 
established in her hackney-coach, and rolled off in his own car- 
riage, humming a stanza of the ballad which he is said to have 
composed : — 

" At the sight of Dumbarton once again, 
I'll cock up my bonnet and march amain, 
With my claymore hanging down to my heel, 
To whang at the bannocks of barley meal." 

Perhaps one ought to be actually a Scotsman to conceive how 
ardently, under all distinctions of rank and situation, they feel their 
mutual connection with each other as natives of the same country. 
There are, I believe, more associations common to the inhabitants 
of a rude and wild, than of a well-cultivated and fertile country ; 
their ancestors have more seldom changed their place of residence-; 
their mutual recollection of remarkable objects is more accurate ; 
the high and the low are more interested in each other's welfare : the 
feelings of kindred and relationship are more widely extended, and, 
in a word, the bonds of patriotic affection, always honourable even 
when a little too exclusively strained, have more influence on men's 
feelings and actions. 

The rumbling hackney-coach which tumbled over the (then) 
execrable London pavement, at a rate very different from that 
which had conveyed the ducal carriage to Richmond, at length 
deposited Jeanie Deans and her attendant at the national sign of 
the Thistle. Mrs. Glass, who had been in long and anxious expec- 
tation, now rushed, full of eager curiosity and open-mouthed inter- 
rogation, upon our heroine, who was positively unable to sustain 
the overwhelming cataract of her questions, which burst forth with 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 313 

the sublimity of a grand gardyloo : — " Had she seen the Duke, God 
bless him — the Duchess — the young ladies ? — Had she seen the 
King, God bless him — the Queen — the Prince of Wales — the 
Princess — or any of the rest of the royal family ? — Had she got her 
sister's pardon ?— Was it out and out — or was it only a commutation 
of punishment ?— How far had she gone — where had she driven tas. 
— whom had she seen- — what had been said— what had kept her so 
long?" 

Such were the various questions huddled upon each other by a 
curiosity so eager, that it could hardly wait for its own gratification. 
Jeanie would have been more than sufficiently embarrassed by this 
overbearing tide of interrogations, had not Archibald, who had pro>- 
bably received from his master a hint to that purpose, advanced to 
her rescue. " Mrs. Glass," said Archibald, " his Grace desired me 
particularly to say, that he would take it as a great favour if you 
would ask the young woman no questions, as he wishes to explain 
to you more distinctly than she can do how her affairs stand, and 
consult you on some matters which she cannot altogether so well 
explain. The Duke will call at the Thistle to-morrow or next day 
for that purpose." 

"His Grace is very condescending," said Mrs. Glass, her zeal for 
inquiry slaked for the present by the dexterous administration of 
this sugar plum—" his Grace is sensible that I am in a manner 
accountable for the conduct of my young kinswoman, and no doubt 
his Grace is the best judge how far he should intrust her or me 
with the management of her affairs." 

" His Grace is quite sensible of that," answered Archibald, with 
national gravity, " and will certainly trust what he has to say to the 
most discreet of the two ; and therefore, Mrs. Glass, his Grace 
relies you will speak nothing to Mrs. Jean Deans, either of her own 
affairs or her sister's until he sees you himself. He desired me to 
assure you, in the meanwhile, that all was going on as well as your 
kindness could wish, Mrs. Glass." 

" His Grace is very kind — very considerate certainly, Mr. Archi- 
bald — his Grace's commands shall be obeyed, and But you" have 

had a far drive, Mr. Archibald, as I guess by the time of your 
absence, and I guess" (with an engaging smile) "you winna be the 
waur 0' a glass of the right Rosa Solis." 

" I thank you, Mrs. Glass," said the great man's great man, " but 
I am under the necessity of returning to my Lord directly." And 
making his adieus civilly to both cousins, he left the shop of the 
-Lady of the Thistle. 

" I am glad your affairs have prospered so well, Jeanie, my love," 
said Mrs. Glass ; " though, indeed, there was little fear of them so 
soon as the Duke of Argyle was so condescending as to take them 
into hand. I will ask you no questions about them, because his 
Grace, who is most considerate and prudent in such matters, in>- 
tends to tell me all that you ken yourself, dear, and doubtless a 
great deal more ; so that anything that may lie heavily on your 
mind may be imparted to me in the meantime, as you see it is his 
Grace's pleasure that I should be made acquainted with the whole 



314 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

matter forthwith, and whether you or he tells it, will make no dif- 
ference in the world, ye ken. If I ken what he is going to say 
beforehand, I will be much more ready to give my advice, and 
whether you or he tell me about it, cannot much signify after all, 
my dear. So you may just say whatever you like, only mind I ask 
you no questions about it." 

Jeanie was a little embarrassed. She thought that the communi- 
cation she had to make was perhaps the only means she might 
have in her power to gratify her friendly and hospitable kinswoman. 
But her prudence instantly suggested that her secret interview with 
Queen Caroline, which seemed to pass under a certain sort of 
mystery, was not a proper subject for the gossip of a woman like 
Mrs. Glass, of whose heart she had a much better opinion than of 
her prudence. She, therefore, answered in general, that the Duke 
had had the extraordinary kindness to make very particular in- 
quiries into her sister's bad affair, and that he thought he had found 
the means of putting it a' straight again, but that he proposed to 
tell all that he thought about the matter to Mrs. Glass herself. 

This did not quite satisfy the penetrating Mistress of the Thistle. 
Searching as her own small rappee, she, in spite of her promise, 
urged Jeanie with still farther questions. " Had she been a' that 
time at Argyle-house ? Was the Duke with her the whole time ? 
and had she seen the Duchess ? and had she seen the young ladies 
—and specially Lady Caroline Campbell ? " — To these questions 
Jeanie gave the general reply, that she knew so little of the town 
that she could not tell exactly where she had been ; that she had 
not seen the Duchess to her knowledge ; that she had seen two 
ladies, one of whom, she understood, bore the name of Caroline ; 
and more, she said, she could not tell about the matter. 

" It would be the Duke's eldest daughter, Lady Caroline Camp- 
bell — there is no doubt of that," said Mrs. Glass ; " but, doubtless, 
I shall know more particularly through his Grace. — And so, as the 
cloth is laid in the little parlour above stairs, and it is past three 
o'clock, for I have been waiting this hour for you, and I have had 
a snack myself ; and, as they used to say in Scotland in my time — 
I do not ken if the word be used now — there is ill talking between 
a full body and a fasting." 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 

Heaven first taught letters for some wretch's aid — 
Some banish'd lover or some captive maid. 

Pope. 

By dint of unwonted labour with the pen, Jeanie Deans con- 
trived to indite, and give to the charge of the postman on the 
ensuing day, no less than three letters, an exertion altogether 
strange to her habits ; insomuch so, that, if milk had been plenty, 
she would rather have made thrice as many Dunlop cheeses. The 
first of them was very brief. It was addressed to George Staunton, 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 315 

Esq., at the Rectory, Willingham, by Grantham ; the address 
being part of the information which she had extracted from the 
communicative peasant who rode before her to Stamford. It was 
in these words :— 

"Sir, — To prevent farder mischieves,. whereof there hath been 
enough, comes these : Sir, I have my sister's pardon from the 
Queen's Majesty, whereof I do not doubt you will be glad, having 
had to say naut of matters whereof you know the purport. So, sir, 
I pray for your better welfare in bodie and soul, and that it will 
please the fisycian to visit you in His good time. Alwaies, sir, I 
pray you will never come again to see my sister, whereof there has 
been too much. And so, wishing you no evil, but even your best 
good, that you may be turned from your iniquity, (for why suld ye 
die ?) I rest your humble servant to command, 

" Ye ken wha." 

The next letter was to her father. It is too long altogether for 
insertion, so we only give a few extracts. It commenced— 

" Dearest and truly honoured Father. — This comes with my duty 
to inform you, that it has pleased God to redeem that captivitie of 
my poor sister, in respect the Queen's blessed Majesty, for whom 
we are ever bound to pray, hath redeemed her soul from the slayer, 
granting the ransom of her, -whilk is ane pardon or reprieve. And- 
I spoke with the Queen face to face, and yet live ; for she is not 
muckle differing from other grand leddies, saving that she has a 
stately .presence, and een like a blue huntin' hawk's, whilk gaed 
.'throu' and throu' me like a Highland durk — And all this good was, 
alway under the Great Giver, to whom all are but instruments, 
wrought forth for us by the Duk of Argile, wha is ane native true- 
hearted Scotsman, and not pridefu', like other folk we ken of — and 
likewise skeely enow in bestial', whereof he has promised to gie 
me twa Devonshire kye, of which he is enamoured, although I do 
still haud by the real hawkit Airshire breed — and I have promised 
him a cheese ; and I wad wuss ye, if Gowans, the brockit cow, has 
a quey, that she suld suck her fill of milk, as I am given to under- 
stand he has none of that breed, and is not scornfu', but will take 
a thing frae a puir body, that it may lighten their heart of the load- 
ing of debt that they awe him. Also his honour the Duke will 
accept ane of our Dunlop cheeses, and it sail be my faut if a better 
was ever yearned in Lowden." — [Here follow some observations 
respecting the breed of cattle, and the produce of the dairy, which 
it is our intention to forward to the Board of Agriculture.] — " Never- 
theless, these are but matters of the after-harvest, in respect of the 
great good which Providence hath gifted us with — and, in especial, 
poor Erne's life. And, Oh, my dear father, since it hath pleased 
God to be merciful to her, let her not want your free pardon, whilk 
will make her meet to be ane vessel of grace, and also a comfort to 
your ain graie hairs. Dear Father, will ye let the Laird ken that 
we have had friends strangely raised up to us, and that the talent 
whilk he lent me will be thankfully repaid. I hae some of it to the 



316 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

fore ; and the rest of it is not knotted up in ane purse or napkin, 
but in ane wee bit paper, as is the fashion heir, whilk I am assured 
is gude for the siller. And, dear father, through Mr. Butler's 
means I hae gude friendship with the Duke, for their had been 
kindness between their forbears in the auld troublesome time bye- 
past. And Mrs. Glass has been kind like my very mother. She 
has a braw house here, and lives bien and warm, wi' twa servant 
lasses, and a man and a callant in the shop. And she is to send 
you doun a pound of her hie-dried, and some other tobaka, and we 
maun think of some propine for her, since her kindness hath been 
great. And the Duk is to send the pardun doun by an express 
messenger, in respect that I canna travel sae fast ; and I am to 
come doun wi' twa of his Honour's servants — that is, John Archi- 
bald, a decent elderly gentleman, that says he has seen you lang 
syne, when ye were buying beasts in the west frae the Laird of 
Aughtermuggitie — but maybe ye winna mind him — ony way, he's 
a civil man— and Mrs. Dolly Dutton, that is to be dairy-maid at 
Inverara ; and they bring me on as far as Glasgo', whilk will make 
it nae pinch to win hame, whilk I desire of all things. May the 
Giver of all good things keep ye in your outgauns and incomings, 
whereof devoutly prayeth your loving dauter, 

"Jean Deans." 

The third letter was to Butler, and its tenor as follows ; — 

"Master Butler, 
" Sir, — It will be pleasure to you to ken, that all I came for is, 
thanks be to God, weel dune and to the gude end, and that your 
forbear's letter was right welcome to the Duke of Argile, and that 
he wrote your name down with a kylevine pen in a leathern book, 
whereby it seems like he will do for you either wi' a scule or a kirk ; 
he has enow of baith, as I am assured. And I have seen the 
queen, which gave me a hussy-case out of her own hand. She had 
not her crown and skeptre, but they are laid by for her, like the 
bairn's best claise, to be worn when she needs them. And they are 
keepit in a tour, whilk is not like the tour of Libberton, nor yet 
Craigmillar, but mair like to the castell of Edinburgh, if the build- 
ings were taen and set down in the midst of the Nor'-Loch. Also 
the Queen was very bounteous, giving me a paper worth fiftie 
pounds, as I am assured, to pay my expenses here and back agen. 
Sae, Master Butler, as we were aye neebours' bairns, forby ony 
thing else that may hae been spoken between us, I trust you winna 
skrimp yoursell for what is needfu' for your health, since it signifies 
not muckle whilk o' us has the siller, if the other wants it. And 
mind this is no meant to haud ye to onything whilk ye wad rather 
forget, if ye'suld get a charge of a kirk or a scule, as above said. 
Only I hope it will be a scule, and not a kirk, because of these diffi- 
culties anent aiths and patronages, whilk might gang ill down wi' 
my honest father. Only if ye could compass a harmonious call 
frae the parish of Skreegh-me-dead, as ye anes had hope of, I trow 
it wad please him weel ; since I hae heard him say, that the root of 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 317 

the matter was mair deeply hafted in that wild muirland parish than 
in the Canongate of Edinburgh. I wish I had whaten books ye 
I wanted, Mr. Butler, for they hae haill houses of them here, and 
they are obliged to set sum out in the street, whilk are said cheap, 
' doubtless, to get them out of the weather. It is a muckle place, and 
' I hae seen sae muckle of it, that my poor head turns round. And 
ye ken langsyne, I am nae great pen-woman — and it is near eleven 
o'clock o' the nicht. I am cumming doun in good company, and 
safe — and I had troubles in gaun up whilk makes me blither of 
travelling wi' ken'd folk. My cousin, Mrs. Glass, has a braw house 
here, but a' thing is sae poisoned wi' snuff, that I am like to be 
scomfished whiles. But what signifies these things, in comparison 
of the great deliverance whilk has been vouchsafed to my father's 
house, in whilk you, as our auld and dear well-wisher, will, I dout 
not, rejoice and be exceedingly glad. And I am, dear Mr. Butler, 
your sincere well-wisher in temporal and eternal things, 

"J. D." 

After these labours of an unwonted kind, Jeanie retired to her 
bed, yet scarce could sleep a few minutes together, so often was she 
awakened by the heart-stirring consciousness of her sister's safety, 
and so powerfully urged to deposit her burden of joy, where she had 
before laid her doubts and sorrows, in the warm and sincere 
exercises of devotion. 

All the next, and all the succeeding day, Mrs. Glass fidgeted 
about her shop in the agony of expectation, like a pea (to use a 
vulgar simile which her profession renders appropriate) upon one of 
her own tobacco-pipes. With the third morning came the expected 
coach, with four servants clustered behind on the foot-board, in 
dark brown and yellow liveries ; the Duke in person, with laced 
coat, gold-headed cane, star and garter, all, as the story-book says, 
very grand. 

He inquired for his little countrywoman of Mrs. Glass, but with- 
out requesting to see her, probably because he was unwilling to 
give an appearance of personal intercourse betwixt them, which 
scandal might have misinterpreted. " The Queen," he said to Mrs. 
Glass, " had taken the case of her kinswoman into her gracious 
consideration, and being specially moved by the affectionate and 
resolute character of the elder sister, had condescended to use her 
powerful intercession with his Majesty, in consequence of which a 
pardon had been despatched to Scotland to Effie Deans, on condi- 
tion of her banishing herself forth of Scotland for fourteen years. 
The King's Advocate had insisted," he said, " upon this qualifica- 
tion of the pardon, having pointed out to his Majesty's ministers, 
that, within the course of only seven years, twenty-one instances of 
child-murder had occurred in Scotland." 

" Weary on him ! " said Mrs. Glass, " what for needed he to have 
telled that of his ain country, and to the English folk abune a' ? I 
used aye to think the Advocate a douce decent man, but it is an 
ill-bird — begging your Grace's pardon for speaking of such a coorse 
by-word. And then what is the poor lassie to do in a foreign land ? 



318 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

— Why, wae's me, it's just sending her to play the same pranks 
ower again, out of sight or guidance of her friends." 

" Pooh ! pooh ! " said the Duke, " that need not be anticipated. 
Why, she may come up to London, or she may go over to America, 
and marry well for all that is come and gone." 

" In troth, and so she may, as your Grace is pleased to intimate," 
replied Mrs. Glass ; " and now I think upon it, there is my old 
correspondent in Virginia, Ephraim Buckskin, that has supplied 
the Thistle this forty years with tobacco, and it is not a little that 
serves our turn, and he has been writing to me this ten years to 
send him out a wife. The carle is not above sixty, and hale and 
hearty, and well to pass in the world, and a line from my hand 
would settle the matter, and Eme Deans's misfortune (forby that 
there is no special occasion to speak about it) would be thought 
little,of there/' 

" Is she a pretty girl? " said the Duke ; "her sister does not get 
beyond a good comely sonsy lass." 

" Oh, far prettier is Eme than Jeanie," said Mrs. Glass ; " though 
it is long since I saw her mysell, but I hear of the Deanses by all 
my Lowden friends when they come — your Grace kens we Scots • 
are clannish bodies." 

" So much the better for us,'' said the Duke, " and the worse for 
those who meddle with us, as your good old-fashioned sign says, 
Mrs. Glass. And now I hope you will approve of the measures I., 
have taken for restoring your kinswoman to her friends." These he 
detailed at length, and Mrs. Glass gave her unqualified approba- 
tion, with a smile and a curtsey at every sentence. " And now, 
Mrs. Glass, you must tell Jeanie, I hope she will not forget my 
cheese when she gets down to Scotland. Archibald has my orders 
to arrange all her expenses." 

" Begging your Grace's humble pardon," said Mrs. Glass, " it's a 
pity to trouble yourself about them; the > Deanses are wealthy 
people in their way, and the lass has money in her pocket." 

" That's all very true," said the Duke ; " but you know, where 
MacCallummore travels he pays all ; it is our Highland privilege 
to take from all what we want, and to give to all what they want." 

" Your Grace is better at giving than'taking," said" Mrs. Glass. 

" To show you the contrary," said the Duke, " I will fill my box 
out of this canister without paying you a bawbee ; " and again de- 
siring to be remembered to Jeanie, with his good wishes for her 
safe journey, he departed, leaving Mrs. Glass uplifted in heart and 
in countenance, the proudest and happiest of tobacco and snuff 
dealers. 

Reflectively, his Grace's good humour and affability had a favour- 
able effect upon Jeanie's situation. Her kinswoman, though civil 
and kind to her, had acquired too much of London breeding to be 
perfectly satisfied with her cousin's rustic and national dress, and 
was, besides, something scandalized at the cause of her journey to 
London. Mrs. Glass might, therefore, have been less sedulous in 
her attentions towards Jeanie, but for the interest which the fore- 
most of the Scottish nobles (for such, in all. men's estimation, was 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 319 

the Duke of Argyle) seemed to take in her fate. Now, however, as 
a kinswoman whose virtues and domestic affections had attracted 
the notice and approbation of royalty itself, Jeanie stood to her 
relative in a light very different and much more favourable, and was 
not only treated with kindness, but with actual observance and 
respect. 

It depended upon herself alone to have made as many visits, and 
seen as many sights, as lay within Mrs. Glass's power to compass. 
But, excepting that she dined abroad with one or two " far away 
kinsfolk," and that she paid the same respect, on Mrs. Glass's strong 
urgency, to Mrs. Deputy Dabby, wife of the Worshipful Mr. 
Deputy Dabby, of Farringdon Without, she did not avail herself 
of the opportunity. As Mrs. Dabby was the second lady of great 
rank whom Jeanie had seen in London, she used sometimes after- 
wards to draw a parallel betwixt her and the Queen, in which she 
observed, " that Mrs. Dabby was dressed twice as grand, and was 
twice as big, and spoke twice as loud, and twice as muckle, as the 
Queen did, but she hadna the same goss-hawk glance that makes 
the skin creep, and the knee bend ; and though she had very kindly 
gifted her with a loaf of sugar and twa punds of tea, yet she hadna 
a'thegither the sweet look that the Queen had when she put the 
needle-book into her hand." 

Jeanie might have enjoyed the sights and novelties of this great 
city more, had it not been for the qualification added to her sister's 
pardon, which greatly grieved her affectionate disposition. On this 
subject, however, her mind was somewhat relieved by a letter which 
she received in return of post, in answer to that which she had 
written to her father. With his affectionate blessing, it brought his 
full approbation of the step which she had taken, as one inspired by 
the immediate dictates of Heaven, and which she had been thrust 
upon her in order that she might become the means of safety to a 
perishing household. 

" If ever a deliverance was dear and precious, this,'' said the 
letter, " is a dear and precious deliverance — and if life saved can be 
made more sweet and savoury, it is when it cometh by the hands of 
those whom we hold in the ties of affection. And do not let your 
heart be disquieted within you, that this victim, who is rescued from 
the horns of the altar, whereuntil she was fast bound by the chains 
of human law, is now to be driven beyond the bounds of our land. 
Scotland is a blessed land to those who love the ordinances of 
Christianity, and it is a faer land to look upon, and dear to them 
who have dwelt in it a' their days ; and weel said that judicious 
Christian, worthy John Livingstone, a sailor in Borrowstouness, as 
the famous Patrick Walker reporteth his words, that howbeit he 
thought Scotland was a Gehennah of wickedness when he was at 
home, yet when he was abroad, he accounted it ane paradise ; for 
the evils of Scotland he found everywhere, and the good of Scotland, 
he found nowhere. But we are to hold in remembrance that Scot- 
land, though it be our native land, and the land of our fathers, is not 
like- Goshen, in Egypt, on whilk the sun of the heavens and of. the 
gospel shineth allenarly, and leaveth the rest of the world in utter 



S20 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

darkness. Therefore, and also because this increase of profit at 
Saint Leonard's Crags may be a cauld waff of wind blawing from 
the frozen land of earthly self, where never plant of grace took root 
or grew, and because my concerns make me take something ower 
muckle a grip of the gear of the warld in mine arms, I receive this 
dispensation anent Effie as a call to depart out of Haran, as 
righteous Abraham of old, and leave my father's kindred and my 
mother's house, and the ashes and mould of them who have gone 
to sleep before me, and which wait to be mingled with these auld 
crazed bones of mine own. And my heart is lightened to do this, 
when I call to mind the decay of active and earnest religion in this 
land, and survey the height and the depth, the length and the 
breadth, of national defections, and how the love of many is waxing 
lukewarm and cold ; and I am strengthened in this resolution to 
change my domicile likewise, as I hear that store-farms are to be set 
at an easy mail in Northumberland, where there are many precious 
souls that are of our true, though suffering persuasion. And sic 
part of the kye or stock as I judge it fit to keep, may be driven 
thither without incommodity- — say about Wooler, or that gate, 
keeping aye a shouther to the hills, — and the rest may be sauld to 
gude profit and advantage, if we had grace weel to use and guide 
these gifts of the warld. The Laird has been a true friend on our 
unhappy occasions, and I have paid him back the siller for Effie's 
misfortune, whereof Mr. Nichil Novit returned him no balance, as 
the Laird and I did expect he wad hae done. But law licks up a', 
as the common folk say. I have had the siller to borrow out of sax 
purses. Mr. Saddletree advised to give the Laird of Lounsbeck a 
charge on his band for a thousand merks. But I hae nae broo' of 
charges, since that awfu' morning that a tout of a horn, at the 
Cross of Edinburgh, blew half the faithfu r ministers of Scotland out 
of their pulpits. However, I sail raise an adjudication, whilk Mr. 
Saddletree says comes instead of the auld apprisings, and will not 
lose weel-won gear with the like of him, if it may be helped. As 
for the Queen, and the credit that she hath done to a poor man's 
daughter, and the mercy and the grace ye found with her, I can 
only pray for her weel-being here and hereafter, for the establish- 
ment of her house now and for ever, upon the throne of these king- 
doms. I doubt not but what you told her Majesty, that I was the 
same David Deans of whom there was a sport at the Revolution, 
when I noited thegither the heads of twa false prophets, these un- 
gracious Graces the prelates, as they stood on the Hie Street, after 
being expelled from the Convention-parliament. The Duke of 
Argyle is a noble and true-hearted nobleman, who pleads the cause 
of the poor, and those who have none to help them ; verily his re- 
ward shall not be lacking unto him. — I have been writing of many 
things, but not of that whilk lies nearest mine heart. I have seen 
the misguided thing ; she will be at freedom the morn, on enacted 
caution that she shall leave Scotland in four weeks. Her mind is 
in an evil frame, — casting her eye backward on Egypt, I doubt, as 
if the bitter waters of the wilderness were harder to endure than the 
brick furnaces, by the side of which there were savoury flesh pots. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 321 

I need not bid you make haste down, for you are, excepting always 
my Great Master, my only comfort in these straits. I charge you 
to withdraw your feet from the delusion of that Vanity-fair in 
whilk ye are a sojourner, and not to go to their worship, whilk is 
an ill-mumbled mass, as it was weel termed by James the Sext, 
though he afterwards, with his unhappy son, strove to bring it ower 
back and belly into his native kingdom, wherethrough their race 
have been cut off as foam upon the water, and shall be as wanderers 
among the nations — see the prophecies of Hosea, ninth and seven- 
teenth, and the same, tenth and seventh. But us and our house, 
let us say with the same prophet, ' Let us return to the Lord, for he 
hath torn, and he will heal us — He hath smitten, and he will bind 
us up."' 

He proceeded to say, that he approved of her proposed mode of 
returning by Glasgow, and entered into sundry minute particulars 
not necessary to be quoted. A single line in the letter, but not the 
least frequently read by the party to whom it was addressed, inti- 
mated, that " Reuben Butler had been as a son to him in his sor- 
rows." As David Deans scarce ever mentioned Butler before, with- 
out some gibe, more or less direct, either at his carnal gifts and 
learning, or at his grandfather's heresy, Jeanie drew a good omen 
from no such qualifying clause being added to this sentence respect- 
ing him. 

A lover's hope resembles the bean in the nursery tale, — let it 
once take root, and it will grow so rapidly, that in the course of a 
few hours the giant Imagination builds a castle on the top, and by 
and by cqmes Disappointment with the " curtal axe," and hews 
down both the plant and the superstructure. Jeanie's fancy, 
though not the most powerful of her faculties, was lively enough to 
transport her to a wild farm in Northumberland, well stocked with 
milk-cows, yeald beasts, and sheep ; a meeting-house, hard by, 
frequented by serious presbyterians, who had united in a harmo- 
nious call to Reuben Butler to be their spiritual guide — Erne 
restored, not to gaiety, but to cheerfulness at least — their father, 
with his grey hairs smoothed down, and spectacles on his nose — 
herself, with the maiden snood exchanged for a matron's curch — all 
arranged in a pew in the said meeting-house, listening to words 
of devotion, rendered sweeter and more powerful by the affectionate 
ties which combined them with the preacher. She cherished such 
visions from day to day, until her residence in London began to 
become insupportable and tedious to her ; and it was with no ordi- 
nary satisfaction that she received a summons from Argyle-house, 
requiring her in two days to be prepared to join their northward 
party. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 



CHAPTER XL. 

One was a female, who had grievous ill 
Wrought in revenge, and she enjoy'd it still ; 
Sullen she was, and threatening ; in her eye 
Glared the stern triumph that she dared to die. 

Crabbe. 

The summons of preparation arrived after Jeanie Deans had 
resided in the metropolis about three weeks. 

On the morning appointed she took a grateful farewell of Mrs. 
Glass, as that good woman's attention to her particularly required, 
placed herself and her movable goods, which purchases and pre- 
sents had greatly increased, in a hackney-coach, and joined her 
travelling companions in the housekeeper's apartment at Argyle- 
house. While the carriage was getting ready, she was informed 
that the Duke wished to speak with her ; and being ushered into a 
splendid saloon, she was surprised to find that he wished to present 
her to his lady and daughters. 

" I bring you my little countrywoman, Duchess,'' these were the 
words of the introduction. " With an army of young fellows, as 
gallant and steady as she is, and a good cause, I would not fear two 
to one." 

" Ah, papa ! " said a lively young lady, about twelve years old, 
"remember you were full one to two at Sheriff-muir, and yet," 
(singing the well-known ballad) — 

" ' Some say that we wan, and some say that they wan, 
And some say that nane wan at a', man ; 
But of ae thing I'm sure, that on Sheriff-muir 
A battle there was that I saw, man.' " 

" What, little Mary turned Tory on my hands ?— This will be fine 
news for our countrywoman to carry down to Scotland ! " 

" We may all turn Tories for the thanks we have got for remain- 
ing Whigs," said the second young lady. 

" Well, hold your peace, you discontented monkeys, and go dress 
your babies ; and as for the Bob of Dumblane, 

' If it wasna weel bobbit, weel bobbit, weel bobbit, 
If it wasna weel bobbit, we'll bobb it again.' " 

" Papa's wit is running low," said Lady Mary: " the poor gentle- 
man is repeating himself— he sang that on the field of battle, when 
he was told the Highlanders had cut his left wing to pieces with 
their claymores." 

A pull by the hair was a repartee to this sally. 

" Ah ! brave Highlanders and bright claymores," said the Duke, 

well do I wish them, < for a' the ill they've done me yet,' as the 
song goes.— But come, madcaps, say a civil word to your country- 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 323 

woman — I wish ye had half her canny namely sense ; I think you 
may be as leal and true hearted." 

The Duchess advanced, and, in few words, in which there was 
as much' kindness as civility, assured Jeanie of the respect which 
she had for a character so affectionate, and yet so firm, and added, 
" When you get home, you will perhaps hear from me." 

" And from me." " And from me." " And from me, Jeanie," 
added the young ladies one after the other, " for you are a credit to 
the land we love so well." 

Jeanie, overpowered with these unexpected compliments, and not 
aware that the Duke's investigation had made him acquainted with 
her behaviour on her sister's trial, could only answer by blushing, 
and curtseying round and round, and uttering at intervals, " Mony 
thanks ! mony thanks ! " - 

"Jeanie," said the Duke, "you must have dock art dorroch, or 
you will be unable to travel." 

There was a salver with cake and wine on the table. He took 
up a glass, drank " to all true hearts that lo'ed Scotland," and 
offered a glass to his guest. 

Jeanie, however, declined it, saying, " that she had never tasted 
wine ,in her life." 

" How comes that, Jeanie ? " said the Duke, — " wine maketh glad 
the heart, you know." 

" Ay, sir, but my father is like Jonadab the son of Rechab, who 
charged his children that they should drink no wine." 

" I thought your father would have had more sense," said the 
- Duke, unless indeed he prefers brandy. But however, Jeanie, if 
you will not drink,you must eat, to save the character of my house." 

He thrust upon her a large piece of cake, nor would he permit 
her to break off a fragment, and lay the rest on the salver. " Put 
it in your pouch, Jeanie," said he ; " you will be glad of it before 
you see St. Giles's steeple. I wish to Heaven I were to see it as 
soon as you ! and so my best service to all my friends at and about 
Auld Reekie, and a blithe journey to you." 

And, mixing the frankness of a soldier with his natural affability, 
he shook hands with his protegee, and committed her to the charge 
of Archibald, satisfied that he had provided sufficiently for her 
being attended to by his domestics, from the unusual attention 
. with which he had himself treated her. 

Accordingly, in the course of her journey, she found both her 
companions disposed to pay her every possible civility, sp that her 
return, in point of comfort and safety, formed a strong contrast to 
.her journey to London. 

Her heart also was disburdened of the weight of grief, shame, ap- 
prehension, and fear, which had loaded her before her interview 
with the Queen at Richmond. But the human mind is so strangely 
capricious, that, when freed from the pressure of real misery, it 
.becomes open and sensitive to the apprehension of ideal calamities. 
She was now much disturbed in mind, that she had heard nothing 
from Reuben Butler, to whom the operation of writing was so much 
more familiar than itwas to herself. 

x2 



324 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

"It would have cost him sae little fash,'' she said to herself; 
" for I hae seen his pen gang as fast owerthe paper, as ever it did 
ower the water when it was in the grey goose's wing. Wae's me! 
maybe he may be badly— but then my father wad likely hae said 
something about it— Or maybe he had taen the rue, and kensna. 
how to let me wot of his change of mind. He needna be at muckle 
fash about it,"— she went on, drawing herself up though the tear 
of honest pride and injured affection gathered in her eye, as she 
entertained the suspicion. — " Jeanie Deans is no the lass to pu' him 
by the sleeve, or put him in mind of what he wishes to forget. I 
shall wish him weel and happy a' the same ; and if he has the luck 
to get a kirk in our country, I sail gang and hear him just the very 
same, to show that I bear nae malice." And as she imagined the 
scene, the tear stole over her eye. 

In these melancholy reveries, Jeanie had full time to indulge her- 
self ; for her travelling companions, servants in a distinguished 
and fashionable family, had, of course, many topics of conversation, 
in which it was absolutely impossible she could have either plea- 
sure or portion. She had, therefore, abundant leisure for reflection, 
and even for self-tormenting, during the several days which, 
indulging the young horses the Duke was sending down to the 
North with sufficient ease and short stages, they occupied in reach- 
ing the neighbourhood of Carlisle. 

In approaching the vicinity of that ancient city they discerned a 
considerable crowd upon an eminence at a little distance from the 
high road, and learned from some passengers who were gathering 
towards that busy scene from the southward, that the cause of the 
concourse was, the laudable public desire " to see a domned Scotch 
witch and thief get half of her due upo' Haribee-broo' yonder, for 
she was only to be hanged ; she should hae been boomed aloive 
an' cheap on't." 

" Dear Mr. Archibald," said the dame of the dairy elect, " I 
never seed a woman hanged in a' my life, and only four men, as 
aiade a goodly spectacle." 

Mr. Archibald, however, was a Scotchman, and promised himself 
ao exuberant pleasure in seeing his countrywoman undergo ,"the 
terrible behests of law." Moreover, he was a man of sense and 
delicacy in his way, and the late circumstances of Jeanie's family, 
with the cause of her expedition to London, were not unknown to 
him ; so that he answered dryly, it was impossible to stop, as he 
roust be early at Carlisle on some business of the Duke's, and he 
accordingly bid the postilions get on. 

The road at that time passed at about a quarter of a mile's dis- 
tance from the eminence, called Haribee or Harabee-brow, which, 
though it is very moderate in size and height, is nevertheless seen 
from a great distance around, owing to the flatness of the country 
through which the Eden flows. Here many an outlaw, and border- 
rider of both kingdoms, had wavered in the wind during the wars, 
and scarce less hostile truces, between the two countries. Upon 
Harabee, in latter days, other executions had taken place with as 
little ceremony as compassion; for these frontier provinces re- 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 325 

mained long unsettled, and, even at the time of which we write, 
were ruder than those in the centre of England. 

The postilions drove on, wheeling, as the Penrith road led them, 
round the verge of the rising ground. Yet still the eyes of Mrs. 
Dolly Dutton, which, with the head and substantial person to which 
they belonged, were all turned towards the scene of action, could 
discern plainly the outline of the gallows-tree, relieved against the 
clear sky, the dark shade formed by the persons of the executioner 
and the criminal upon the light rounds of the tall aerial ladder, 
until one of the objects, launched into the air, gave unequivocal 
signs of mortal agony, though appearing in the distance not larger 
than a spider dependent at the extremity of his iinvisible thread, 
while the remaining form descended from its elevated situation, 
and regained with all speed an undistinguished place among the 
crowd. This termination of the tragic scene drew forth of course 
a squall from Mrs. Dutton, and Jeanie, with instinctive curiosity, 
turned her head in the same direction. 

The sight of a female culprit in the act of undergoing the fatal 
punishment from which her beloved sister had been so recently 
rescued, was too much, not perhaps for her nerves, but for her 
mind and feelings. She turned her head to the other side of the 
carriage, with a sensation of sickness, of loathing, and of fainting. 
Her female companion overwhelmed her with questions, with prof- 
fers of assistance, with requests that the carriage might be stopped 
— that a doctor might be fetched — that drops, might be gotten — 
that burnt feathers and asafcetida, fair water, and hartshorn, 
might be procured, all at once, and without one instant's delay. 
Archibald, more calm and considerate, only desired the carriage to 
push forward ; and it was not till they had got beyond sight of the 
fatal spectacle, that, seeing the deadly paleness of Jeanie's counte- 
nance, he stopped the carriage, and jumping out himself, went 
in search of the most obvious and most easily procured of Mrs. 
Dutton's pharmacopoeia — a draught, namely, of fair water. 

While Archibald was absent on this good-natured piece of ser- 
vice, damning the ditches which produced nothing but mud, and 
thinking upon the thousand bubbling springlets of his own moun- 
tains, the attendants on the execution began to pass the stationary 
vehicle in their way back to Carlisle. 

From their half-heard and half-understood words, Jeanie, whose 
attention was involuntarily riveted by them, as that of children is 
by ghost stories, though they know the pain with which they will 
afterwards remember them, Jeanie, 1 say, could discern that the 
jpresent victim of the law had died game, as it is termed by those 
mnfortunates ; that is, sullen, reckless, and impenitent, neither fear- 
ing God nor regarding man. 

" A sture woife, and a dour," said one Cumbrian peasant, as he 
•clattered by in his wooden brogues, with a noise like the trampling 
■of a dray-horse. 

" She has gone to ho master, with ho's name in her mouth,'' said 
another ; " Shame the country should be harried wi' Scotch witches 
and Scotch bitches this gate — but I say hang and drown." 



326 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

" Ay, ay, Gaffer Tramp, take awa yealdon, take awa low— hang 
the witch, and there will be less scathe amang us ; mine owsen hae 
been reckan this towmont." 

"And mine bairns hae been crining two, mon,'' replied his 
neighbour. 

" Silence wi' your fule tongues, ye churls," said an old woman, 
who hobbled past them, as they stood talking near the carriage ; 
" this was nae witch, but a bluidy-fingered thief and murderess." 

" Ay ? was it e'en sae, Dame Hinchup ?" said one in a civil tone, 
and stepping out of his place to let the old woman pass along the 
foot-path — " Nay, you know best, sure — but at ony rate, we hae but 
tint a Scot of her, and that's a thing better lost than found." 

The old woman passed on without making any answer. 

" Ay, ay, neighbour," said Gaffer Tramp, " seest thou how one 
witch will speak for t'other— Scots or English, the same to them." 

His companion shook his head, and replied in the same subdued 
tone, " Ay, ay, when a Sarkfoot wife gets on her broomstick, the 
dames of Allonby are ready to mount, just as sure as the by-word 
gangs o' the hills, 

If Skiddaw hath a cap, 
Criffel wots full weel of that." 

" But," continued Gaffer Tramp, " thinkest thou the daughter o' 
yon hangit body isna as rank a witch as ho ? " 

" I kenna clearly," returned the fellow, " but the folk are speak- 
ing o' swimming her i' the Eden." And they passed on their several 
roads, after wishing each other good-morning. 

Just as the clowns left the place, and as Mr. Archibald returned 
with some fair water, a crowd of boys and girls, and some of the 
lower rabble of more mature age, came up from the place of execu- 
tion, grouping themselves with many a yell of delight around a tall 
female fantastically dressed, who was dancing, leaping, and bound- 
ing in the midst of them. A horrible recollection pressed on Jeanie 
as she looked on this unfortunate creature ; and the reminiscence 
was mutual, for by a sudden exertion of great strength and agility, 
Madge Wildfire broke out of the noisy circle of tormentors who 
surrounded her, and clinging fast to the door of the calash, uttered, . 
in a sound betwixt laughter and screaming, " Eh, d'ye ken, Jeanie 
Deans, they hae hangit our mother ? " Then suddenly changing her 
tone to that of the most piteous entreaty, she added, " O gar them 
let me gang to cut her down ! — let me but cut her down ! — she is 
my mother, if she was waur than the deil, and she'll be nae mair 
kenspeckle than half-hangit Maggie Dickson, that cried saut mony 
a day after she had been hangit ; her voice was roupit and hoarse, 
and her neck was a wee agee, or ye wad hae ken'd nae odds on her 
frae ony other saut-wife." 

Mr. Archibald, embarrassed by the madwoman's clinging to the 
carriage, and detaining around them her noisy and mischievous 
attendants, was all this while looking out for a constable or beadle, 
to whom he might commit the unfortunate creature. But seeing 
no such person of authority, he endeavoured to loosen her hold 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 327 

r 

from the carriage, that they might escape from her by driving on. 
This, however, could hardly be achieved without some degree of 
violence ; Madge held fast, and renewed her frantic entreaties to 
be permitted to cut down her mother. " It was but a tenpenny 
tow lost," she said, " and what was that to a woman's life ? " There 
came up, however, a parcel of savage-looking fellows, butchers and 
graziers chiefly, among wljose cattle there had been of late a very 
general and fatal distemper, which their wisdom imputed to witch- 
craft. They laid violent hands on Madge, and tore her from the 
carriage, exclaiming — " What, doest stop folk o' king's highway ? 
Hast no done mischief enow already, wi' thy murders and thy 
witcherings ? " 

" Oh Jeanie Deans — Jeanie Deans !" exclaimed the poor maniac, 
" save my mother, and I will take ye to the Interpreter's house 
again, — and I will teach ye a' my bonny sangs, — and I will tell ye 

what came o' the " The rest of her entreaties were drowned 

in the shouts of the rabble. 

" Save her, for God's, sake ! — save her from those people ? " ex- 
claimed Jeanie to Archibald. 

" She is mad, but quite innocent ; she is mad, gentlemen," said. 
Archibald ; " do not use her ill, take her before the Mayor." 

" Ay, ay, we'se hae care enow on her," answered one of the fel- 
lows ; " gang thou thy gate, man, and mind thine own matters." 

" He's a Scot by his tongue," said another ; " and an he will 
come out o' his whirligig there, I'se gie him his tartan plaid fu' o' 
broken banes." 

It was clear nothing could be done to rescue Madge ; and Archi- 
bald, who was a man of humanity, could only bid the postilions 
hurry on to Carlisle, that he might obtain some assistance to the 
unfortunate woman. As they drove off, they heard the hoarse roar 
with which the mob preface acts of riot or cruelty, yet even above 
that deep and dire note, they could discern the screams of the un- 
fortunate victim. They were soon out of hearing of the cries, but had 
no sooner entered the streets of Carlisle, than Archibald, at Jeanie's 
earnest and urgent entreaty, went to a magistrate, to state the 
cruelty which was likely to be exercised on this unhappy creature. 

In about an hour and a half he returned, and reported to Jeanie, 
that the magistrate had very readily gone in person, with some as- 
sistants, to the rescue of the unfortunate woman, and that he had 
himself accompanied him ; that when they came to the muddy 
pool, in which the mob were ducking her, according to their 
favourite mode of punishment, the magistrate succeeded in rescu- 
ing her from their hands, but in a state of insensibility owing to 
the cruel treatment which she had received. He added, that he 
had seen her carried to the workhouse, and understood that she 
had been brought to herself, and was expected to do well. 

This last averment was a slight alteration in point of fact, for 
Madge Wildfire was not expected to survive the treatment she had 
received ; but Jeanie seemed so much agitated, that Mr. Archibald 
did not think it prudent to tell her the worst at once. Indeed, she , 
appeared so fluttered and disordered by *his alarming accident 



328 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

that, although it had been their intention to proceed to Longtown 
that evening, her companions judged it most advisable to pass the 
night at Carlisle. 

This was particularly agreeable to Jeanie, who resolved, if pos- 
sible, to procure an interview with Madge Wildfire. Connecting 
some of her wild flights with the narrative of George Staunton, she 
was unwilling to omit. the opportunity of extracting from her, if 
possible, some information concerning the fate of that unfortunate 
infant which had cost her sister so dear. Her acquaintance with 
the disordered state of poor Madge's mind did not permit her to 
cherish much hope that she could acquire from her any useful in- 
telligence ; but then, since Madge's mother had suffered her de- 
serts, and was silent for ever, it was her only chance of obtaining 
any kind of information, and she was loath to lose the opportunity. 

She coloured her wish to Mr. Archibald by saying, that she had 
seen Madge formerly, and wished to know, as a matter of humanity, 
how she was attended to under her present misfortunes. That 
complaisant person immediately went to the workhouse, or hospital, 
in which he had seen the sufferer lodged, and brought back for 
reply, that the medical attendants positively forbade her seeing any 
one. When the application for admittance was repeated next day, 
Mr. Archibald was informed that she had been very quiet and 
composed, insomuch that the clergyman, who acted as chaplain to 
the establishment, thought it expedient to read prayers beside her 
bed, but that her wandering fit of mind had returned soon after his 
departure ; however, her countrywoman might see her if she chose 
it. She was not expected to live above an hour or two. 

Jeanie had no sooner received this information, than she hastened 
to the hospital, her companions attending her. They found the 
dying person in a large ward, where there were ten beds, of which 
the patient's was the only one occupied. 

Madge was singing when they entered — singing her own wild 
snatches of songs and obsolete airs, with a voice no longer over- 
strained by false spirits, but softened, saddened, and subdued by 
bodily exhaustion. She was still insane, but was no longer able to 
express her wandering ideas in the wild notes of her former state 
of exalted imagination. There was death in the plaintive tones of 
her voice, which yet, in this moderated and melancholy mood, had 
something of the lulling sound with which a mother sings her infant 
asleep. As Jeanie entered, she heard first the air, and then a part 
of the chorus and words, of what had been, perhaps, the song of a 
jolly harvest-home : 

" Our work is over — over now, 
The goodman wipes his weary brow, 
The last long wain wends slow away, 
And we are free to sport and play. 

" The night comes on when sets the sun, 
And labour ends when day is done. 
When Autumn's gone and Winter's come, 
We hold our jovial harvest-home." 



THE HEART OF MtD-LOTHIAN, 329 

, Jeanie advanced to the bed-side when the strain was finished, 
and addressed Madge by her name. But it produced no symptoms 
of recollection. On the contrary, the patient, like one provoked by 
interruption, changed her posture, and called out, with an impatient 
tone, " Nurse — nurse, turn my face to the wa', that I may never 
answer to thatname ony mair, and never see mair of a wicked world." 
The attendant on the hospital arranged her in her bed as she 
desired, with her face to the wall and her back to the light. So 
soon as she was quiet in this new position, she began again to sing 
in the same low and modulated strains, as if she was recovering 
the state of abstraction which the" interruption of her visitants had 
disturbed. The strain, however, was different, and rather resembled 
the music of the Methodist hymns, though the measure of the song 
was similar to that of the former : 

" When the fight of grace is fought, — 
When the marriage vest is wrought, — 
When Faith hath chased cold Doubt away, 
And Hope but sickens at delay, — 
When Charity, imprison'd here, 
Longs for a more expanded sphere, 
Doff thy robes of sin and clay ; 
Christian, rise, and come away." 

The strain was solemn and affecting, sustained as it was by the 
pathetic'warble of a voice which had naturally been a fine one, and 
which weakness, if it diminished its power, had improved in soft- 
ness. Archibald, though a follower of the court, and a poco-curante 
by profession, was confused, if not affected ; the dairy-maid blub- 
bered ; and Jeanie felt the tears rise spontaneously to her eyes. 
Even the nurse, accustomed to all modes in which the spirit can 
pass, seemed considerably moved. 

The patient was evidently growing weaker, as was intimated by 
an apparent difficulty of breathing, which seized her from time to 
time, and by the utterance of low listless moans, intimating that 
nature was succumbing in the last conflict. But the spirit of 
melody, which must originally have so strongly possessed this un- 
fortunate young woman, seemed, at every interval of ease, to 
triumph over her pain and weakness. And it was remarkable, that 
there could always be traced in her songs something appropriate, 
though perhaps only obliquely or collaterally so, to her present 
situation. Her next seemed the fragment of some old ballad : 

" Cauld is my bed, Lord Archibald, 
And sad my sleep of sorrow ; 
But thine sail be as sad and cauld, 
My fause true-love ! to-morrow. 
" And weep ye not, my maidens free, 
Though death your mistress borrow j 
For he for whom I die to-day, 
Shall die for me to-morrow.' 

Again she changed the tune to one wilder, less monotonous, and 



33° THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

less regular. But of the words, only a fragment or two could be 
collected by those who listened to this singular scene : 

" Proud Maisie is in the wood, 
Walking so early ; 
Sweet Robin sits on the bush, 
Singing so rarely. 
" ' Tell me, thou bonny bird, 
When shall I marry me ?' 
' When six braw gentlemen 
Kirkward shall carry ye.' 

* * * 
" ' Who makes the bridal bed, 

Birdie, say truly?' — 
' The grey-headed sexton, 
That delves the grave duly.' 

* * # 

" The glow-worm o'er grave and stone 
Shall light thee steady ; 
The owl from the steeple sing, 
' Welcome, proud lady.' " 

Her voice died away with the last notes, and she fell into a. 
slumber, from which the experienced attendant assured them, that 
she never would awake at all, or only in the death agony. 

The nurse's prophecy proved true. The poor maniac parted with 
existence, without again uttering a sound of any kind. But our 
travellers did not witness this catastrophe. They left the hospital 
as soon as Jeanie had satisfied herself that no elucidation of her 
sister's misfortunes was to be hoped from the dying person.* 



CHAPTER XLI. 



Wilt thou go on with me ? 
The moon is bright, the sea is calm, 
And I know well the ocean paths .... 
Thou wilt go on with me ! 

Thalaba. 
The fatigue and agitation of these various scenes had agitated 
Jeanie so much, notwithstanding her robust strength of constitu- 
tion, that Archibald judged it necessary that she should have a 
day's repose at the village of Longtown. It was in vain that 
Jeanie herself protested against any delay. The Duke of Argyle's 
man of confidence was of course consequential; and as he had 
been bred to the medical profession in his youth, (at least he used 
this expression to describe his having, thirty years before, pounded 
for six months in the mortar of old Mungo Mangleman, the surgeon 
at Greenock,) he was obstinate whenever a matter of health was in 
question. 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 331 

In this case he discovered febrile symptoms, and having once 
made a happy application of that learned phrase to Jeanie's case, 
all farther resistance became in vain ; and she was glad to ac- 
quiesce, and even to go to bed, and drink water-gruel, in order that 
she might possess her soul in quiet and without interruption. 

Mr. Archibald was equally attentive in another particular. He 
observed that the execution of the old woman, and the miserable 
fate of her daughter, seemed to have had a more powerful effect 
upon Jeanie's mind, than the usual feelings of humanity might 
naturally have been expected to occasion. Yet she was obviously 
a" strong-minded, sensible young woman, and in no respect subject 
to nervous affections ; and therefore Archibald, being ignorant of 
any special connection between his master's protegee and these un- 
fortunate persons, excepting that she had seen Madge formerly in 
Scotland, naturally imputed the strong impression these events had 
made upon her, to her associating them with the unhappy circum- 
stances in which her sister had so lately stood. He became 
anxious, therefore, to prevent anything occurring which might re- 
call these associations to Jeanie's mind. 

Archibald had speedily an opportunity of exercising this precau- 
tion. A pedlar brought to Longtown that evening, amongst other 
wares, a large broad-side sheet, giving an account of the "Last 
Speech and Execution of Margaret Murdockson, and of the bar- 
barous Murder of her Daughter, Magdalene or Madge Murdockson, 
called Madge Wildfire ; and of her pious conversation with his 
Reverence Archdeacon Fleming ;" which authentic publication 
had apparently taken place on the day they left Carlisle, and being 
an article of a nature peculiarly acceptable to such country-folk as 
were within hearing of the transaction, the itinerant bibliopolist 
had forthwith added them to his stock in trade. He found a mer- 
chant sooner than he expected ; for Archibald, much applauding 
his own prudence, purchased the whole lot for two shillings and 
ninepence ; and the pedlar, delighted with the profit of such a 
wholesale transaction, instantly returned to Carlisle to supply him- 
self with more. 

The considerate Mr. Archibald was about to commit his whole 
purchase to the flames, but it was rescued by the yet more consi- 
derate dairy-damsel, who said, very prudently, it was a pity to 
waste so much paper, which might crepe hair, pin up bonnets, and 
serve many other useful purposes ; and who promised to put the 
parcel into her own trunk, and keep it carefully out of the sight of 
Mrs. Jeanie Deans : " Though, by the by, she had no great notion 
of folk being so very nice. Mrs. Deans might have had enough to 
think about the gallows all this time to endure a sight of it, without 
all this to do about it." 

Archibald reminded the dame of the dairy of the Duke's very 
particular charge, that they should be attentive and civil to Jeanie ; 
as also that they were to part company soon, and consequently 
would not be doomed to observing any one's health or tempei 
during the rest of the journey. With which answer Mrs. Dolly 
Dutton was obliged to hold herself satisfied. 



333 THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 

On the morning they resumed their journey, and prosecuted it 
successfully, travelling through Dumfries-shire and part of Lanark- 
shire, until they arrived at the small town of Rutherglen, within 
about two miles of Glasgow. Here an express brought letters 
to Archibald from the principal agent of the Duke of Argyle in 
Edinburgh. 

He said nothing of their contents that evening ; but when they 
were seated in the carriage the next day, the faithful squire in- 
formed Jeanie, that he had received directions from the Duke's 
factor, to whom his Grace had recommended him to carry her, if 
she had no objection, for a stage or two beyond Glasgow. Some 
temporary causes of discontent had occasioned tumults in that city 
and the neighbourhood, which would render it unadvisable for 
Mrs. Jeanie Deans to travel alone and unprotected betwixt that 
city and Edinburgh ; whereas, by going forward a little farther, 
they would meet one of his Grace's subfactors, who was coming 
down from the Highlands to Edinburgh with his wife, and under 
whose charge she might journey with comfort and in safety. 

Jeanie remonstrated against this arrangement. " She had been 
lang," she said, " frae hame — her father and her sister behoved to 
be very anxious to see her — there were other friends she had that 
werena weel in health. She was willing to pay for man and horse 
at Glasgow, and surely naebody wad meddle wi' sae harmless and 
feckless a creature as she was — She was muckle obliged by the 
offer ; but never hunted deer langed for its resting-place as I do to 
find myself at Saint Leonard's." 

The groom of the chambers exchanged a look with his female 
companion, which seemed so full of meaning, that Jeanie screamed 
aloud — " O Mr. Archibald — Mrs. Dutton, if ye ken of onything 
that has happened at Saint Leonard's, for God's sake — for pity's 
sake, tell me, and dinna keep me in suspense ! " 

" I really know nothing, Mrs. Deans," said the groom of the 
chambers. 

" And I — I — I am sure, I know as little/' said the dame of the 
dairy, while some communication seemed to tremble on her lips, 
which, at a glance of Archibald's eye, she appeared to swallow 
down, and compressed her lips thereafter into a state of extreme 
and vigilant firmness, as if she had been afraid of its bolting out 
before she was aware. 

Jeanie saw there was to be something concealed from her, and it 
was only the repeated assurances, of Archibald that her father — 
her sister — all her friends were, as far as he knew, well and happy, 
that at all pacified her alarm. From such respectable people as 
those with whom she travelled she could apprehend no harm, and 
yet her distress was so obvious, that Archibald, as a last resource, 
pulled out, and put into her hand, a slip of paper, on which these 
words were written : — 

"Jeanie Deans— You will do me a favour by going with Archi- 
bald and my female domestic a day's journey beyond Glasgow, and 
asking them no questions, which will greatly oblige your friend, 

Argyle & Greenwich." 




(^ 



THE HEART OF MID-LOTHIAN. 333 

Although this laconic epistle, from a noblemen to whom she was 
bound by such inestimable obligations, silenced all Jeanie's objec- 
tions to the proposed route, it rather added to than diminished the 
eagerness of her curiosity. The proceeding to Glasgow seemed 
now no longer to be an object with her fellow-travellers. On the 
contrary, they kept the left-hand side of the river Clyde, and tra- 
velled through a thousand beautiful and changing views down the 
side of that noble stream, till, ceasing to hold its inland character, 
it began to assume that of a navigable river. 

" You are not for gaun intill Glasgow then ? " said Jeanie, as she 
observed that the drivers made no motion for inclining their horses' 
heads towards the ancient bridge, which was then the only mode of 
access to St. Mungo's capital. 

" No," replied Archibald ; " there is some popular commotion, 
and as our Duke is in opposition to the court, perhaps we might be 
too well received ; or they might take it in their heads to remember 
that the Captain of Carrick came down upon them with his High- 
landmen in the time of Shawfield's mob in 1725, and then we would 
be too ill received. * And, at any rate, it is best for us, and for me in 
particular, who may be supposed to possess his Grace's mind upon 
many particulars, to leave the good people of the Gorbals to act 
according to their own imaginations, without either provoking or 
encouraging them by my presence." 

To reasoning of such tone and consequence Jeanie had nothing 
to reply, although it seemed to her to contain fully as much self- 
importance as truth. 

The carriage meantime roll